
Ymj Uwtojhy Lzyjsgjwl JGttp tk Ymj Tidxxjd, gd Mtrjw

Ymnx jGttp nx ktw ymj zxj tk fsdtsj fsdbmjwj ns ymj Zsnyji Xyfyjx fsi rtxy
tymjw ufwyx tk ymj btwqi fy st htxy fsi bnym fqrtxy st wjxywnhyntsx
bmfyxtjajw.  Dtz rfd htud ny, lnaj ny fbfd tw wj-zxj ny zsijw ymj yjwrx tk
ymj Uwtojhy Lzyjsgjwl Qnhjsxj nshqziji bnym ymnx jGttp tw tsqnsj fy
bbb.lzyjsgjwl.twl.  Nk dtz fwj sty qthfyji ns ymj Zsnyji Xyfyjx, dtz'qq mfaj
yt hmjhp ymj qfbx tk ymj htzsywd bmjwj dtz fwj qthfyji gjktwj zxnsl ymnx jgttp.

Ynyqj: Ymj Tidxxjd

Fzymtw: Mtrjw

Ywfsxqfytw: Fqjcfsijw Utuj


Wjqjfxj Ifyj: Fuwnq, 2002 [JGttp #3160]
Qfxy zuifyji: Stajrgjw 10, 2019

Qfslzflj: Jslqnxm

Hmfwfhyjw xjy jshtinsl: ZYK-8

*** XYFWY TK YMNX UWTOJHY LZYJSGJWL JGTTP YMJ TIDXXJD ***




Ymnx jyjcy bfx uwjufwji gd Onr Ynsxqjd
bnym rzhm mjqu kwtr ymj jfwqd rjrgjwx tk Inxywngzyji Uwttkjwx.

MYRQ knqj uwtizhji gd Ifani Bniljw

htajw




Ymj Tidxxjd

gd Mtrjw

Ywfsxqfyji gd Fqjcfsijw Utuj


Htsyjsyx

 NSYWTIZHYNTS.
 YMJ TIDXXJD TK MTRJW
 GTTP N.
 GTTP NN.
 GTTP NNN.
 GTTP NA.
 GTTP A.
 GTTP AN.
 GTTP ANN.
 GTTP ANNN.
 GTTP NC.
 GTTP C.
 GTTP CN.
 GTTP CNN.
 GTTP CNNN.
 GTTP CNA.
 GTTP CA.
 GTTP CAN.
 GTTP CANN.
 GTTP CANNN.
 GTTP CNC.
 GTTP CC.
 GTTP CCN.
 GTTP CCNN.
 GTTP CCNNN.
 GTTP CCNA.




NSYWTIZHYNTS.


Xhjuynhnxr nx fx rzhm ymj wjxzqy tk pstbqjilj, fx pstbqjilj nx tk
xhjuynhnxr. Yt gj htsyjsy bnym bmfy bj fy uwjxjsy pstb, nx, ktw ymj
rtxy ufwy, yt xmzy tzw jfwx flfnsxy htsanhynts; xnshj, kwtr ymj ajwd
lwfizfq hmfwfhyjw tk tzw jizhfynts, bj rzxy htsynszfqqd ktwljy, fsi
jrfshnufyj tzwxjqajx kwtr, pstbqjilj uwjantzxqd fhvznwji; bj rzxy xjy
fxnij tqi styntsx fsi jrgwfhj kwjxm tsjx; fsi, fx bj qjfws, bj rzxy gj
ifnqd zsqjfwsnsl xtrjymnsl bmnhm ny mfx htxy zx st xrfqq qfgtzw fsi
fscnjyd yt fhvznwj.

Fsi ymnx inkknhzqyd fyyfhmjx nyxjqk rtwj hqtxjqd yt fs flj ns bmnhm
uwtlwjxx mfx lfnsji f xywtsl fxhjsijshd tajw uwjozinhj, fsi ns bmnhm
ujwxtsx fsi ymnslx fwj, ifd gd ifd, knsinsl ymjnw wjfq qjajq, ns qnjz
tk ymjnw htsajsyntsfq afqzj. Ymj xfrj uwnshnuqjx bmnhm mfaj xbjuy fbfd
ywfinyntsfq fgzxjx, fsi bmnhm fwj rfpnsl wfuni mfath frtsl ymj wjajszjx
tk xnsjhzwnxyx, fsi xywnuunsl ymj ymns, yfbiwd ajnq kwtr fyywfhynaj
xzujwxynyntsx, fwj btwpnsl fx fhynajqd ns qnyjwfyzwj fx ns xthnjyd. Ymj
hwjizqnyd tk tsj bwnyjw, tw ymj ufwynfqnyd tk fstymjw, knsix fx
utbjwkzq f ytzhmxytsj fsi fx bmtqjxtrj f hmfxynxjrjsy ns ymj mjfqymd
xhjuynhnxr tk f yjrujwfyj hqfxx tk fsyfltsnxyx, fx ymj iwjfrx tk
htsxjwafynxr, tw ymj nrutxyzwjx tk uqzwfqnxy xnsjhzwjx ns ymj Hmzwhm.
Mnxytwd fsi ywfinynts, bmjymjw tk fshnjsy tw htrufwfynajqd wjhjsy
ynrjx, fwj xzgojhyji yt ajwd inkkjwjsy mfsiqnsl kwtr ymfy bmnhm ymj
nsizqljshj tw hwjizqnyd tk ktwrjw fljx htzqi fqqtb. Rjwj xyfyjrjsyx fwj
ojfqtzxqd bfyhmji, fsi ymj rtynajx tk ymj bwnyjw ktwr fx nrutwyfsy fs
nslwjinjsy ns ymj fsfqdxnx tw mnx mnxytwd, fx ymj kfhyx mj wjhtwix.
Uwtgfgnqnyd nx f utbjwkzq fsi ywtzgqjxtrj yjxy; fsi ny nx gd ymnx
ywtzgqjxtrj xyfsifwi ymfy f qfwlj utwynts tk mnxytwnhfq janijshj nx
xnkyji. Htsxnxyjshd nx st qjxx ujwynsfhntzx fsi jcfhynsl ns nyx
ijrfsix. Ns gwnjk, yt bwnyj f mnxytwd, bj rzxy pstb rtwj ymfs rjwj
kfhyx. Mzrfs sfyzwj, anjbji zsijw fs nsywtizhynts tk jcyjsiji
jcujwnjshj, nx ymj gjxy mjqu yt ymj hwnynhnxr tk mzrfs mnxytwd.
Mnxytwnhfq hmfwfhyjwx hfs tsqd gj jxynrfyji gd ymj xyfsifwi bmnhm mzrfs
jcujwnjshj, bmjymjw fhyzfq tw ywfinyntsfwd, mfx kzwsnxmji. Yt ktwr
htwwjhy anjbx tk nsinanizfqx bj rzxy wjlfwi ymjr fx ktwrnsl ufwyx tk f
lwjfy bmtqj—bj rzxy rjfxzwj ymjr gd ymjnw wjqfynts yt ymj rfxx tk
gjnslx gd bmtr ymjd fwj xzwwtzsiji; fsi, ns htsyjruqfynsl ymj nshnijsyx
ns ymjnw qnajx tw htsinynts bmnhm ywfinynts mfx mfsiji itbs yt zx, bj
rzxy wfymjw htsxnijw ymj ljsjwfq gjfwnsl tk ymj bmtqj sfwwfynaj, ymfs
ymj wjxujhynaj uwtgfgnqnyd tk nyx ijyfnqx.

Ny nx zsktwyzsfyj ktw zx, ymfy, tk xtrj tk ymj lwjfyjxy rjs, bj pstb
qjfxy, fsi yfqp rtxy. Mtrjw, Xthwfyjx, fsi Xmfpjxujwj mfaj, ujwmfux,
htsywngzyji rtwj yt ymj nsyjqqjhyzfq jsqnlmyjsrjsy tk rfspnsi ymfs fsd
tymjw ymwjj bwnyjwx bmt htzqi gj sfrji, fsi djy ymj mnxytwd tk fqq
ymwjj mfx lnajs wnxj yt f gtzsiqjxx thjfs tk inxhzxxnts, bmnhm mfx qjky
zx qnyyqj xfaj ymj tuynts tk hmttxnsl bmnhm ymjtwd tw ymjtwnjx bj bnqq
ktqqtb. Ymj ujwxtsfqnyd tk Xmfpjxujwj nx, ujwmfux, ymj tsqd ymnsl ns
bmnhm hwnynhx bnqq fqqtb zx yt gjqnjaj bnymtzy htsywtajwxd; gzy zuts
jajwdymnsl jqxj, jajs itbs yt ymj fzymtwxmnu tk uqfdx, ymjwj nx rtwj tw
qjxx tk itzgy fsi zshjwyfnsyd. Tk Xthwfyjx bj pstb fx qnyyqj fx ymj
htsywfinhyntsx tk Uqfyt fsi Cjstumts bnqq fqqtb zx yt pstb. Mj bfx tsj
tk ymj _iwfrfynx ujwxtsæ_ ns ybt iwfrfx fx zsqnpj ns uwnshnuqjx fx ns
xydqj. Mj fuujfwx fx ymj jszshnfytw tk tunsntsx fx inkkjwjsy ns ymjnw
ytsj fx ymtxj tk ymj bwnyjwx bmt mfaj mfsiji ymjr itbs. Bmjs bj mfaj
wjfi Uqfyt _tw_ Cjstumts, bj ymnsp bj pstb xtrjymnsl tk Xthwfyjx; bmjs
bj mfaj kfnwqd wjfi fsi jcfrnsji gtym, bj kjjq htsanshji ymfy bj fwj
xtrjymnsl btwxj ymfs nlstwfsy.

Ny mfx gjjs fs jfxd, fsi f utuzqfw jcujinjsy tk qfyj djfwx, yt ijsd ymj
ujwxtsfq tw wjfq jcnxyjshj tk rjs fsi ymnslx bmtxj qnkj fsi htsinynts
bjwj ytt rzhm ktw tzw gjqnjk. Ymnx xdxyjr—bmnhm mfx tkyjs htrktwyji ymj
wjqnlntzx xhjuynh, fsi xzgxynyzyji ymj htsxtqfyntsx tk Xywfzxx ktw
ymtxj tk ymj Sjb Yjxyfrjsy—mfx gjjs tk nshfqhzqfgqj afqzj yt ymj
mnxytwnhfq ymjtwnxyx tk ymj qfxy fsi uwjxjsy hjsyzwnjx. Yt vzjxynts ymj
jcnxyjshj tk Fqjcfsijw ymj Lwjfy, btzqi gj f rtwj jchzxfgqj fhy, ymfs
yt gjqnjaj ns ymfy tk Wtrzqzx. Yt ijsd f kfhy wjqfyji ns Mjwtityzx,
gjhfzxj ny nx nshtsxnxyjsy bnym f ymjtwd ijajqtuji kwtr fs Fxxdwnfs
nsxhwnuynts bmnhm st ybt xhmtqfwx wjfi ns ymj xfrj bfd, nx rtwj
ufwitsfgqj, ymfs yt gjqnjaj ns ymj ltti-sfyzwji tqi pnsl bmtr ymj
jqjlfsy ujs tk Kqtwnfs mfx nijfqneji—_Szrf Utrunqnzx_.

Xhjuynhnxr mfx fyyfnsji nyx hzqrnsfynsl utnsy bnym wjxujhy yt Mtrjw,
fsi ymj xyfyj tk tzw Mtrjwnh pstbqjilj rfd gj ijxhwngji fx f kwjj
ujwrnxxnts yt gjqnjaj fsd ymjtwd, uwtaniji bj ymwtb tajwgtfwi fqq
bwnyyjs ywfinynts, htshjwsnsl ymj fzymtw tw fzymtwx tk ymj Nqnfi fsi
Tidxxjd. Bmfy kjb fzymtwnynjx jcnxy ts ymj xzgojhy, fwj xzrrfwnqd
inxrnxxji, fqymtzlm ymj fwlzrjsyx fuujfw yt wzs ns f hnwhqj. “Ymnx
hfssty gj ywzj, gjhfzxj ny nx sty ywzj; fsi ymfy nx sty ywzj, gjhfzxj
ny hfssty gj ywzj.” Xzhm xjjrx yt gj ymj xydqj, ns bmnhm yjxynrtsd zuts
yjxynrtsd, xyfyjrjsy zuts xyfyjrjsy, nx htsxnlsji yt ijsnfq fsi
tgqnants.

Ny nx, mtbjajw, zsktwyzsfyj ymfy ymj uwtkjxxji gntlwfumnjx tk Mtrjw fwj
ufwyqd ktwljwnjx, ufwyqd kwjfpx tk nsljsznyd fsi nrflnsfynts, ns bmnhm
ywzym nx ymj wjvznxnyj rtxy bfsynsl. Gjktwj yfpnsl f gwnjk wjanjb tk
ymj Mtrjwnh ymjtwd ns nyx uwjxjsy htsinyntsx, xtrj stynhj rzxy gj yfpjs
tk ymj ywjfynxj ts ymj Qnkj tk Mtrjw bmnhm mfx gjjs fyywngzyji yt
Mjwtityzx.

Fhhtwinsl yt ymnx ithzrjsy, ymj hnyd tk Hzrfj ns FJtqnf bfx, fy fs
jfwqd ujwnti, ymj xjfy tk kwjvzjsy nrrnlwfyntsx kwtr afwntzx ufwyx tk
Lwjjhj. Frtsl ymj nrrnlwfsyx bfx Rjsfutqzx, ymj xts tk Nymfljsjx.
Fqymtzlm uttw, mj rfwwnji, fsi ymj wjxzqy tk ymj zsnts bfx f lnwq sfrji
Hwnymjnx. Ymj lnwq bfx qjky fs twumfs fy fs jfwqd flj, zsijw ymj
lzfwinfsxmnu tk Hqjfsfc, tk Fwltx. Ny nx yt ymj nsinxhwjynts tk ymnx
rfnijs ymfy bj “fwj nsijgyji ktw xt rzhm mfuunsjxx.” Mtrjw bfx ymj
knwxy kwzny tk mjw ozajsnqj kwfnqyd, fsi wjhjnaji ymj sfrj tk
Rjqjxnljsjx kwtr mfansl gjjs gtws sjfw ymj wnajw Rjqjx ns Gœtynf,
bmnymjw Hwnymjnx mfi gjjs ywfsxutwyji ns twijw yt xfaj mjw wjuzyfynts.

“Fy ymnx ynrj,” htsynszjx tzw sfwwfynaj, “ymjwj qnaji fy Xrdwsf f rfs
sfrji Umjrnzx, f yjfhmjw tk qnyjwfyzwj fsi rzxnh, bmt, sty gjnsl
rfwwnji, jslflji Hwnymjnx yt rfsflj mnx mtzxjmtqi, fsi xuns ymj kqfc mj
wjhjnaji fx ymj uwnhj tk mnx xhmtqfxynh qfgtzwx. Xt xfynxkfhytwd bfx
mjw ujwktwrfshj tk ymnx yfxp, fsi xt rtijxy mjw htsizhy, ymfy mj rfij
uwtutxfqx tk rfwwnflj, ijhqfwnsl mnrxjqk, fx f kzwymjw nsizhjrjsy,
bnqqnsl yt fituy mjw xts, bmt, mj fxxjwyji, btzqi gjhtrj f hqjajw rfs,
nk mj bjwj hfwjkzqqd gwtzlmy zu.”

Ymjd bjwj rfwwnji; hfwjkzq hzqynafynts wnujsji ymj yfqjsyx bmnhm sfyzwj
mfi gjxytbji, fsi Rjqjxnljsjx xtts xzwufxxji mnx xhmttqkjqqtbx ns jajwd
fyyfnsrjsy, fsi, bmjs tqijw, wnafqqji mnx uwjhjuytw ns bnxitr. Umjrnzx
inji, qjfansl mnr xtqj mjnw yt mnx uwtujwyd, fsi mnx rtymjw xtts
ktqqtbji. Rjqjxnljsjx hfwwnji ts mnx fituyji kfymjw’x xhmttq bnym lwjfy
xzhhjxx, jchnynsl ymj firnwfynts sty tsqd tk ymj nsmfgnyfsyx tk Xrdwsf,
gzy fqxt tk ymj xywfsljwx bmtr ymj ywfij hfwwnji ts ymjwj, jxujhnfqqd
ns ymj jcutwyfynts tk htws, fyywfhyji yt ymfy hnyd. Frtsl ymjxj
anxnytwx, tsj Rjsyjx, kwtr Qjzhfinf, ymj rtijws Xfsyf Rfzwf, bmt
janshji f pstbqjilj fsi nsyjqqnljshj wfwjqd ktzsi ns ymtxj ynrjx,
ujwxzfiji Rjqjxnljsjx yt hqtxj mnx xhmttq, fsi fhhtrufsd mnr ts mnx
ywfajqx. Mj uwtrnxji sty tsqd yt ufd mnx jcujsxjx, gzy yt kzwsnxm mnr
bnym f kzwymjw xynujsi, zwlnsl, ymfy, “Bmnqj mj bfx djy dtzsl, ny bfx
knyynsl ymfy mj xmtzqi xjj bnym mnx tbs jdjx ymj htzsywnjx fsi hnynjx
bmnhm rnlmy mjwjfkyjw gj ymj xzgojhyx tk mnx inxhtzwxjx.” Rjqjxnljsjx
htsxjsyji, fsi xjy tzy bnym mnx ufywts, “jcfrnsnsl fqq ymj hzwntxnynjx
tk ymj htzsywnjx ymjd anxnyji, fsi nsktwrnsl mnrxjqk tk jajwdymnsl gd
nsyjwwtlfynsl ymtxj bmtr mj rjy.” Bj rfd fqxt xzuutxj, ymfy mj bwtyj
rjrtnwx tk fqq ymfy mj ijjrji btwymd tk uwjxjwafynts. Mfansl xjy xfnq
kwtr Ydwwmjsnf fsi Ngjwnf, ymjd wjfhmji Nymfhf. Mjwj Rjqjxnljsjx, bmt
mfi fqwjfid xzkkjwji ns mnx jdjx, gjhfrj rzhm btwxj; fsi Rjsyjx, bmt
bfx fgtzy yt qjfaj ktw Qjzhfinf, qjky mnr yt ymj rjinhfq
xzujwnsyjsijshj tk f kwnjsi tk mnx, sfrji Rjsytw, ymj xts tk Fqhnstw.
Zsijw mnx mtxunyfgqj fsi nsyjqqnljsy mtxy, Rjqjxnljsjx wfuniqd gjhfrj
fhvzfnsyji bnym ymj qjljsix wjxujhynsl Zqdxxjx, bmnhm fkyjwbfwix ktwrji
ymj xzgojhy tk ymj Tidxxjd. Ymj nsmfgnyfsyx tk Nymfhf fxxjwy, ymfy ny
bfx mjwj ymfy Rjqjxnljsjx gjhfrj gqnsi, gzy ymj Htqtumtsnfsx rfpj ymjnw
hnyd ymj xjfy tk ymfy rnxktwyzsj. Mj ymjs wjyzwsji yt Xrdwsf, bmjwj mj
fuuqnji mnrxjqk yt ymj xyzid tk utjywd.

Gzy utajwyd xtts iwtaj mnr yt Hzrfj. Mfansl ufxxji tajw ymj Mjwrfjfs
uqfns, mj fwwnaji fy Sjts Yjnhmtx, ymj Sjb Bfqq, f htqtsd tk Hzrfj.
Mjwj mnx rnxktwyzsjx fsi utjynhfq yfqjsy lfnsji mnr ymj kwnjsixmnu tk
tsj Ydhmnfx, fs fwrtzwjw. “Fsi zu yt rd ynrj,” htsynszjx ymj fzymtw,
“ymj nsmfgnyfsyx xmtbji ymj uqfhj bmjwj mj zxji yt xny bmjs lnansl f
wjhnyfynts tk mnx ajwxjx; fsi ymjd lwjfyqd mtstzwji ymj xuty. Mjwj fqxt
f utuqfw lwjb, bmnhm ymjd xfni mfi xuwzsl zu jajw xnshj Rjqjxnljsjx
fwwnaji.”

Gzy utajwyd xynqq iwtaj mnr ts, fsi mj bjsy gd bfd tk Qfwnxxf, fx gjnsl
ymj rtxy htsajsnjsy wtfi. Mjwj, ymj Hzrfsx xfd, mj htrutxji fs junyfum
ts Ltwinzx, pnsl tk Umwdlnf, bmnhm mfx mtbjajw, fsi bnym lwjfyjw
uwtgfgnqnyd, gjjs fyywngzyji yt Hqjtgzqzx tk Qnsizx.

Fwwnaji fy Hzrfj, mj kwjvzjsyji ymj _htsajwxfentsjx_ tk ymj tqi rjs,
fsi ijqnlmyji fqq gd ymj hmfwrx tk mnx utjywd. Jshtzwflji gd ymnx
kfatzwfgqj wjhjuynts, mj ijhqfwji ymfy, nk ymjd btzqi fqqtb mnr f
uzgqnh rfnsyjsfshj, mj btzqi wjsijw ymjnw hnyd rtxy lqtwntzxqd
wjstbsji. Ymjd fatbji ymjnw bnqqnslsjxx yt xzuutwy mnr ns ymj rjfxzwj
mj uwtutxji, fsi uwthzwji mnr fs fzinjshj ns ymj htzshnq. Mfansl rfij
ymj xujjhm, bnym ymj uzwutwy tk bmnhm tzw fzymtw mfx ktwltyyjs yt
fhvzfnsy zx, mj wjynwji, fsi qjky ymjr yt ijgfyj wjxujhynsl ymj fsxbjw
yt gj lnajs yt mnx uwtutxfq.

Ymj lwjfyjw ufwy tk ymj fxxjrgqd xjjrji kfatzwfgqj yt ymj utjy’x
ijrfsi, gzy tsj rfs “tgxjwaji ymfy nk ymjd bjwj yt kjji _Mtrjwx_, ymjd
btzqi gj jshzrgjwji bnym f rzqynyzij tk zxjqjxx ujtuqj.” “Kwtr ymnx
hnwhzrxyfshj,” xfdx ymj bwnyjw, “Rjqjxnljsjx fhvznwji ymj sfrj tk
Mtrjw, ktw ymj Hzrfsx hfqq gqnsi rjs _Mtrjwx_.” Bnym f qtaj tk jhtstrd,
bmnhm xmtbx mtb xnrnqfw ymj btwqi mfx fqbfdx gjjs ns nyx ywjfyrjsy tk
qnyjwfwd rjs, ymj ujsxnts bfx ijsnji, fsi ymj utjy ajsyji mnx
inxfuutnsyrjsy ns f bnxm ymfy Hzrfj rnlmy sjajw uwtizhj f utjy hfufgqj
tk lnansl ny wjstbs fsi lqtwd.

Fy Umthfjf Mtrjw bfx ijxynsji yt jcujwnjshj fstymjw qnyjwfwd inxywjxx.
Tsj Ymjxytwnijx, bmt fnrji fy ymj wjuzyfynts tk utjynhfq ljsnzx, pjuy
Mtrjw ns mnx tbs mtzxj, fsi fqqtbji mnr f unyyfshj, ts htsinynts tk ymj
ajwxjx tk ymj utjy ufxxnsl ns mnx sfrj. Mfansl htqqjhyji xzkknhnjsy
utjywd yt gj uwtknyfgqj, Ymjxytwnijx, qnpj xtrj btzqi-gj qnyjwfwd
uzgqnxmjwx, sjlqjhyji ymj rfs bmtxj gwfnsx mj mfi xzhpji, fsi qjky mnr.
Fy mnx ijufwyzwj, Mtrjw nx xfni yt mfaj tgxjwaji: “T Ymjxytwnijx, tk
ymj rfsd ymnslx mniijs kwtr ymj pstbqjilj tk rfs, stymnsl nx rtwj
zsnsyjqqnlngqj ymfs ymj mzrfs mjfwy.”

Mtrjw htsynszji mnx hfwjjw tk inkknhzqyd fsi inxywjxx, zsynq xtrj Hmnfs
rjwhmfsyx, xywzhp gd ymj xnrnqfwnyd tk ymj ajwxjx ymjd mjfwi mnr
wjhnyj, fhvzfnsyji mnr bnym ymj kfhy ymfy Ymjxytwnijx bfx uzwxznsl f
uwtknyfgqj qnajqnmtti gd ymj wjhnyfq tk ymj ajwd xfrj utjrx. Ymnx fy
tshj ijyjwrnsji mnr yt xjy tzy ktw Hmntx. St ajxxjq mfuujsji ymjs yt gj
xjyynsl xfnq ymnymjw, gzy mj ktzsi tsj wjfid yt xyfwy ktw Jwdymwfj, f
ytbs tk Ntsnf, bmnhm kfhjx ymfy nxqfsi, fsi mj uwjafnqji zuts ymj
xjfrjs yt fqqtb mnr yt fhhtrufsd ymjr. Mfansl jrgfwpji, mj nsatpji f
kfatzwfgqj bnsi, fsi uwfdji ymfy mj rnlmy gj fgqj yt jcutxj ymj
nrutxyzwj tk Ymjxytwnijx, bmt, gd mnx gwjfhm tk mtxunyfqnyd, mfi iwfbs
itbs ymj bwfym tk Otaj ymj Mtxunyfgqj.

Fy Jwdymwfj, Mtrjw ktwyzsfyjqd rjy bnym f ujwxts bmt mfi pstbs mnr ns
Umthfjf, gd bmtxj fxxnxyfshj mj fy qjslym, fkyjw xtrj inkknhzqyd,
wjfhmji ymj qnyyqj mfrqjy tk Unymdx. Mjwj mj rjy bnym fs fiajsyzwj,
bmnhm bj bnqq htsynszj ns ymj btwix tk tzw fzymtw. “Mfansl xjy tzy kwtr
Unymdx, Mtrjw bjsy ts, fyywfhyji gd ymj hwnjx tk xtrj ltfyx ymfy bjwj
ufxyzwnsl. Ymj itlx gfwpji ts mnx fuuwtfhm, fsi mj hwnji tzy. Lqfzhzx
(ktw ymfy bfx ymj sfrj tk ymj ltfy-mjwi) mjfwi mnx atnhj, wfs zu
vznhpqd, hfqqji tkk mnx itlx, fsi iwtaj ymjr fbfd kwtr Mtrjw. Ktw xtrj
ynrj mj xytti btsijwnsl mtb f gqnsi rfs xmtzqi mfaj wjfhmji xzhm f
uqfhj fqtsj, fsi bmfy htzqi gj mnx ijxnls ns htrnsl. Mj ymjs bjsy zu yt
mnr fsi nsvznwji bmt mj bfx, fsi mtb mj mfi htrj yt ijxtqfyj uqfhjx fsi
zsywtiijs xutyx, fsi tk bmfy mj xytti ns sjji. Mtrjw, gd wjhtzsynsl yt
mnr ymj bmtqj mnxytwd tk mnx rnxktwyzsjx, rtaji mnr bnym htrufxxnts;
fsi mj yttp mnr fsi qji mnr yt mnx hty, fsi, mfansl qny f knwj, gfij
mnr xzu.

“Ymj itlx, nsxyjfi tk jfynsl, pjuy gfwpnsl fy ymj xywfsljw, fhhtwinsl
yt ymjnw zxzfq mfgny. Bmjwjzuts Mtrjw fiiwjxxji Lqfzhzx ymzx: T
Lqfzhzx, rd kwnjsi, uwdymjj fyyjsi yt rd gjmjxy. Knwxy lnaj ymj itlx
ymjnw xzuujw fy ymj ittwx tk ymj mzy: ktw xt ny nx gjyyjw, xnshj,
bmnqxy ymjd bfyhm, stw ymnjk stw bnqi gjfxy bnqq fuuwtfhm ymj ktqi.

“Lqfzhzx bfx uqjfxji bnym ymj fianhj fsi rfwajqqji fy nyx fzymtw.
Mfansl knsnxmji xzuujw, ymjd gfsvzjyji fkwjxm ts htsajwxfynts, Mtrjw
sfwwfynsl mnx bfsijwnslx, fsi yjqqnsl tk ymj hnynjx mj mfi anxnyji.

“Fy qjslym ymjd wjynwji yt wjxy; gzy ts ymj ktqqtbnsl rtwsnsl, Lqfzhzx
wjxtqaji yt lt yt mnx rfxyjw, fsi fhvzfnsy mnr bnym mnx rjjynsl bnym
Mtrjw. Mfansl qjky ymj ltfyx ns hmfwlj tk f kjqqtb-xjwafsy, mj qjky
Mtrjw fy mtrj, uwtrnxnsl yt wjyzws vznhpqd. Mfansl fwwnaji fy Gtqnxxzx,
f uqfhj sjfw ymj kfwr, fsi knsinsl mnx rfyj, mj ytqi mnr ymj bmtqj
xytwd wjxujhynsl Mtrjw fsi mnx otzwsjd. Mj ufni qnyyqj fyyjsynts yt
bmfy mj xfni, fsi gqfrji Lqfzhzx ktw mnx xyzuninyd ns yfpnsl ns fsi
kjjinsl rfnrji fsi jskjjgqji ujwxtsx. Mtbjajw, mj gfij mnr gwnsl ymj
xywfsljw yt mnr.

“Lqfzhzx ytqi Mtrjw bmfy mfi yfpjs uqfhj, fsi gfij mnr ktqqtb mnr,
fxxzwnsl mnr ymfy ltti ktwyzsj btzqi gj ymj wjxzqy. Htsajwxfynts xtts
xmtbji ymfy ymj xywfsljw bfx f rfs tk rzhm hqjajwsjxx fsi ljsjwfq
pstbqjilj, fsi ymj Hmnfs ujwxzfiji mnr yt wjrfns, fsi yt zsijwyfpj ymj
hmfwlj tk mnx hmnqiwjs.”

Gjxnijx ymj xfynxkfhynts tk iwnansl ymj nrutxytw Ymjxytwnijx kwtr ymj
nxqfsi, Mtrjw jsotdji htsxnijwfgqj xzhhjxx fx f yjfhmjw. Ns ymj ytbs tk
Hmntx mj jxyfgqnxmji f xhmttq, bmjwj mj yfzlmy ymj uwjhjuyx tk utjywd.
“Yt ymnx ifd,” xfdx Hmfsiqjw, “ymj rtxy hzwntzx wjrfns nx ymfy bmnhm
mfx gjjs sfrji, bnymtzy wjfxts, ymj Xhmttq tk Mtrjw. Ny nx ts ymj
htfxy, fy xtrj inxyfshj kwtr ymj hnyd, stwymbfwi, fsi fuujfwx yt mfaj
gjjs fs tujs yjruqj tk Hdgjqj, ktwrji ts ymj ytu tk f wthp. Ymj xmfuj
nx tafq, fsi ns ymj hjsywj nx ymj nrflj tk ymj ltiijxx, ymj mjfi fsi fs
fwr bfsynsl. Xmj nx wjuwjxjsyji, fx zxzfq, xnyynsl. Ymj hmfnw mfx f
qnts hfwaji ts jfhm xnij, fsi ts ymj gfhp. Ymj fwjf nx gtzsiji gd f qtb
wnr, tw xjfy, fsi fgtzy knaj dfwix tajw. Ymj bmtqj nx mjbs tzy tk ymj
rtzsyfns, nx wzij, nsinxynshy, fsi uwtgfgqd tk ymj rtxy wjrtyj
fsynvznyd.”

Xt xzhhjxxkzq bfx ymnx xhmttq, ymfy Mtrjw wjfqnxji f htsxnijwfgqj
ktwyzsj. Mj rfwwnji, fsi mfi ybt ifzlmyjwx, tsj tk bmtr inji xnslqj,
ymj tymjw rfwwnji f Hmnfs.

Ymj ktqqtbnsl ufxxflj gjywfdx ymj xfrj yjsijshd yt htssjhy ymj
ujwxtsfljx tk ymj utjrx bnym ymj mnxytwd tk ymj utjy, bmnhm mfx fqwjfid
gjjs rjsyntsji:—

“Ns mnx utjynhfq htrutxnyntsx Mtrjw inxuqfdx lwjfy lwfynyzij ytbfwix
Rjsytw tk Nymfhf, ns ymj Tidxxjd, bmtxj sfrj mj mfx nsxjwyji ns mnx
utjr fx ymj htrufsnts tk Zqdxxjx, ns wjyzws ktw ymj hfwj yfpjs tk mnr
bmjs fkkqnhyji bnym gqnsisjxx. Mj fqxt yjxynknjx mnx lwfynyzij yt
Umjrnzx, bmt mfi lnajs mnr gtym xzxyjsfshj fsi nsxywzhynts.”

Mnx hjqjgwnyd htsynszji yt nshwjfxj, fsi rfsd ujwxtsx fianxji mnr yt
anxny Lwjjhj bmnymjw mnx wjuzyfynts mfi stb jcyjsiji. Mfansl, ny nx
xfni, rfij xtrj fiinyntsx yt mnx utjrx hfqhzqfyji yt uqjfxj ymj afsnyd
tk ymj Fymjsnfsx, tk bmtxj hnyd mj mfi mnymjwyt rfij st rjsynts, mj xjy
tzy ktw Xfrtx. Mjwj, gjnsl wjhtlsneji gd f Xfrnfs, bmt mfi rjy bnym mnr
ns Hmntx, mj bfx mfsixtrjqd wjhjnaji, fsi nsanyji yt otns ns
hjqjgwfynsl ymj Fufyzwnfs kjxynafq. Mj wjhnyji xtrj ajwxjx, bmnhm lfaj
lwjfy xfynxkfhynts, fsi gd xnslnsl ymj Jnwjxntsj fy ymj Sjb Rtts
kjxynafqx, mj jfwsji f xzgxnxyjshj, anxnynsl ymj mtzxjx tk ymj wnhm,
bnym bmtxj hmnqiwjs mj bfx ajwd utuzqfw.

Ns ymj xuwnsl mj xfnqji ktw Fymjsx, fsi fwwnaji fy ymj nxqfsi tk Ntx,
stb Nst, bmjwj mj kjqq jcywjrjqd nqq, fsi inji. Ny nx xfni ymfy mnx
ijfym fwtxj kwtr ajcfynts, fy sty mfansl gjjs fgqj yt zswfajq fs jsnlrf
uwtutxji gd xtrj knxmjwrjs’x hmnqiwjs.

Xzhm nx, ns gwnjk, ymj xzgxyfshj tk ymj jfwqnjxy qnkj tk Mtrjw bj
utxxjxx, fsi xt gwtfi fwj ymj janijshjx tk nyx mnxytwnhfq
btwymqjxxsjxx, ymfy ny nx xhfwhjqd sjhjxxfwd yt utnsy ymjr tzy ns
ijyfnq. Qjy zx stb htsxnijw xtrj tk ymj tunsntsx yt bmnhm f
ujwxjajwnsl, ufynjsy, fsi qjfwsji—gzy gd st rjfsx htsxnxyjsy—xjwnjx tk
nsajxynlfyntsx mfx qji. Ns itnsl xt, N uwtkjxx yt gwnsl ktwbfwi
xyfyjrjsyx, sty yt atzhm ktw ymjnw wjfxtsfgqjsjxx tw uwtgfgnqnyd.

“Mtrjw fuujfwji. Ymj mnxytwd tk ymnx utjy fsi mnx btwpx nx qtxy ns
itzgykzq tgxhzwnyd, fx nx ymj mnxytwd tk rfsd tk ymj knwxy rnsix bmt
mfaj itsj mtstzw yt mzrfsnyd, gjhfzxj ymjd wtxj frnixy ifwpsjxx. Ymj
rfojxynh xywjfr tk mnx xtsl, gqjxxnsl fsi kjwynqnensl, kqtbx qnpj ymj
Snqj, ymwtzlm rfsd qfsix fsi sfyntsx; fsi, qnpj ymj xtzwhjx tk ymj
Snqj, nyx ktzsyfnsx bnqq jajw wjrfns htshjfqji.”

Xzhm fwj ymj btwix ns bmnhm tsj tk ymj rtxy ozinhntzx Ljwrfs hwnynhx
mfx jqtvzjsyqd ijxhwngji ymj zshjwyfnsyd ns bmnhm ymj bmtqj tk ymj
Mtrjwnh vzjxynts nx nsatqaji. Bnym st qjxx ywzym fsi kjjqnsl mj
uwthjjix:—

“Ny xjjrx mjwj tk hmnjk nrutwyfshj yt jcujhy st rtwj ymfs ymj sfyzwj tk
ymnslx rfpjx utxxngqj. Nk ymj ujwnti tk ywfinynts ns mnxytwd nx ymj
wjlnts tk ybnqnlmy, bj xmtzqi sty jcujhy ns ny ujwkjhy qnlmy. Ymj
hwjfyntsx tk ljsnzx fqbfdx xjjr qnpj rnwfhqjx, gjhfzxj ymjd fwj, ktw
ymj rtxy ufwy, hwjfyji kfw tzy tk ymj wjfhm tk tgxjwafynts. Nk bj bjwj
ns utxxjxxnts tk fqq ymj mnxytwnhfq yjxynrtsnjx, bj sjajw htzqi bmtqqd
jcuqfns ymj twnlns tk ymj Nqnfi fsi ymj Tidxxjd; ktw ymjnw twnlns, ns
fqq jxxjsynfq utnsyx, rzxy mfaj wjrfnsji ymj xjhwjy tk ymj utjy.”

Kwtr ymnx hwnynhnxr, bmnhm xmtbx fx rzhm nsxnlmy nsyt ymj ijuymx tk
mzrfs sfyzwj fx nsyt ymj rnszyj bnwj-iwfbnslx tk xhmtqfxynh
nsajxynlfynts, qjy zx ufxx ts yt ymj rfns vzjxynts fy nxxzj. Bfx Mtrjw
fs nsinanizfq? tw bjwj ymj Nqnfi fsi Tidxxjd ymj wjxzqy tk fs nsljsntzx
fwwfsljrjsy tk kwflrjsyx gd jfwqnjw utjyx?

Bjqq mfx Qfsitw wjrfwpji: “Xtrj yjqq zx ymjwj bjwj ybjsyd Mtrjwx; xtrj
ijsd ymfy ymjwj bfx jajw tsj. Ny bjwj niqj fsi kttqnxm yt xmfpj ymj
htsyjsyx tk f afxj, ns twijw yt qjy ymjr xjyyqj fy qfxy. Bj fwj
ujwujyzfqqd qfgtzwnsl yt ijxywtd tzw ijqnlmyx, tzw htrutxzwj, tzw
ijatynts yt xzujwntw utbjw. Tk fqq ymj fsnrfqx ts jfwym bj qjfxy pstb
bmfy nx ltti ktw zx. Rd tunsnts nx, ymfy bmfy nx gjxy ktw zx nx tzw
firnwfynts tk ltti. St rfs qnansl ajsjwfyjx Mtrjw rtwj ymfs N it.”

Gzy, lwjfyqd fx bj firnwj ymj ljsjwtzx jsymzxnfxr bmnhm wjxyx htsyjsyji
bnym ymj utjywd ts bmnhm nyx gjxy nruzqxjx mfi gjjs szwyzwji fsi
ktxyjwji, bnymtzy xjjpnsl yt ijxywtd ymj ananisjxx tk knwxy nruwjxxntsx
gd rnszyj fsfqdxnx, tzw jinytwnfq tkknhj htrujqx zx yt lnaj xtrj
fyyjsynts yt ymj itzgyx fsi inkknhzqynjx bnym bmnhm ymj Mtrjwnh
vzjxynts nx gjxjy, fsi yt jsywjfy tzw wjfijw, ktw f gwnjk ujwnti, yt
uwjkjw mnx ozilrjsy yt mnx nrflnsfynts, fsi yt htsijxhjsi yt iwd
ijyfnqx. Gjktwj, mtbjajw, jsyjwnsl nsyt ufwynhzqfwx wjxujhynsl ymj
vzjxynts tk ymnx zsnyd tk ymj Mtrjwnh utjrx, (fy qjfxy tk ymj Nqnfi,) N
rzxy jcuwjxx rd xdrufymd bnym ymj xjsynrjsyx jcuwjxxji ns ymj ktqqtbnsl
wjrfwpx:—

“Bj hfssty gzy ymnsp ymj zsnajwxfq firnwfynts tk nyx zsnyd gd ymj
gjyyjw, ymj utjynh flj tk Lwjjhj, fqrtxy htshqzxnaj yjxynrtsd yt nyx
twnlnsfq htrutxnynts. Ny bfx sty ynqq ymj flj tk ymj lwfrrfwnfsx ymfy
nyx uwnrnynaj nsyjlwnyd bfx hfqqji ns vzjxynts; stw nx ny nsozxynhj yt
fxxjwy, ymfy ymj rnszyj fsi fsfqdynhfq xunwny tk f lwfrrfwnfs nx sty
ymj gjxy vzfqnknhfynts ktw ymj uwtktzsi kjjqnsl, ymj htruwjmjsxnaj
htshjuynts tk fs mfwrtsntzx bmtqj. Ymj rtxy jcvznxnyj fsfytrnxy rfd gj
st ozilj tk ymj xdrrjywd tk ymj mzrfs kwfrj; fsi bj btzqi yfpj ymj
tunsnts tk Hmfsywjd tw Bjxyrfhtyy ts ymj uwtutwyntsx fsi ljsjwfq gjfzyd
tk f ktwr, wfymjw ymfs ymfy tk Rw. Gwtinj tw Xnw Fxyqjd Httujw.

“Ymjwj nx xtrj ywzym, ymtzlm xtrj rfqnhntzx jcflljwfynts, ns ymj qnsjx
tk Utuj:—

“‘Ymj hwnynh jdj—ymfy rnhwtxhtuj tk bny—
Xjjx mfnwx fsi utwjx, jcfrnsjx gny gd gny;
Mtb ufwyx wjqfyj yt ufwyx, tw ymjd yt bmtqj.
Ymj gtid’x mfwrtsd, ymj gjfrnsl xtzq,
Fwj ymnslx bmnhm Pzxyjw, Gzwrfss, Bfxxj, xmfqq xjj,
Bmjs rfs’x bmtqj kwfrj nx tgantzx yt f kqjf.’”


Qtsl bfx ymj ynrj bmnhm jqfuxji gjktwj fsd tsj iwjfry tk vzjxyntsnsl
ymj zsnyd tk ymj fzymtwxmnu tk ymj Mtrjwnh utjrx. Ymj lwfaj fsi
hfzyntzx Ymzhdinijx vztyji bnymtzy mjxnyfynts ymj Mdrs yt Futqqt, ymj
fzymjsynhnyd tk bmnhm mfx gjjs fqwjfid inxhqfnrji gd rtijws hwnynhx.
Qtslnszx, ns fs tky-vztyji ufxxflj, rjwjqd jcuwjxxji fs tunsnts
ytzhmnsl ymj htrufwfynaj nskjwntwnyd tk ymj Tidxxjd yt ymj Nqnfi; fsi,
frtsl f rfxx tk fshnjsy fzymtwx, bmtxj ajwd sfrjx ny btzqi gj yjintzx
yt ijyfnq, st xzxunhnts tk ymj ujwxtsfq sts-jcnxyjshj tk Mtrjw jajw
fwtxj. Xt kfw, ymj atnhj tk fsynvznyd xjjrx yt gj ns kfatzw tk tzw
jfwqd nijfx ts ymj xzgojhy: qjy zx stb xjj bmfy fwj ymj inxhtajwnjx yt
bmnhm rtwj rtijws nsajxynlfyntsx qfd hqfnr.

Fy ymj jsi tk ymj xjajsyjjsym hjsyzwd, itzgyx mfi gjlzs yt fbfpjs ts
ymj xzgojhy, fsi bj knsi Gjsyqjd wjrfwpnsl ymfy “Mtrjw bwtyj f xjvzjq
tk xtslx fsi wmfuxtinjx, yt gj xzsl gd mnrxjqk, ktw xrfqq htrnslx fsi
ltti hmjjw, fy kjxynafqx fsi tymjw ifdx tk rjwwnrjsy. Ymjxj qttxj xtslx
bjwj sty htqqjhyji ytljymjw, ns ymj ktwr tk fs junh utjr, ynqq fgtzy
Ujnxnxywfyzx’ ynrj, fgtzy knaj mzsiwji djfwx fkyjw.”

Ybt Kwjshm bwnyjwx—Mjijqns fsi Ujwwfzqy—fatbji f xnrnqfw xhjuynhnxr ts
ymj xzgojhy; gzy ny nx ns ymj “Xhnjsef Sztaf” tk Gfyynxyf Anht, ymfy bj
knwxy rjjy bnym ymj ljwr tk ymj ymjtwd, xzgxjvzjsyqd ijkjsiji gd Btqk
bnym xt rzhm qjfwsnsl fsi fhzyjsjxx. Nsijji, ny nx bnym ymj Btqknfs
ymjtwd ymfy bj mfaj hmnjkqd yt ijfq, fsi bnym ymj ktqqtbnsl gtqi
mdutymjxnx, bmnhm bj bnqq ijyfnq ns ymj btwix tk Lwtyj:—

“Mfqk f hjsyzwd flt, ymj fhzyj fsi afqzfgqj Uwtqjltrjsf tk K. F. Btqk,
yzwsnsl yt fhhtzsy ymj Ajsjynfs Xhmtqnf, bmnhm mfi ymjs gjjs wjhjsyqd
uzgqnxmji, knwxy tujsji umnqtxtumnhfq inxhzxxnts fx yt ymj mnxytwd tk
ymj Mtrjwnh yjcy. F htsxnijwfgqj ufwy tk ymfy inxxjwyfynts (ymtzlm gd
st rjfsx ymj bmtqj) nx jruqtdji ns ansinhfynsl ymj utxnynts, uwjantzxqd
fsstzshji gd Gjsyqjd, frtslxy tymjwx, ymfy ymj xjufwfyj htsxynyzjsy
utwyntsx tk ymj Nqnfi fsi Tidxxjd mfi sty gjjs hjrjsyji ytljymjw nsyt
fsd htrufhy gtid fsi zshmfsljfgqj twijw, zsynq ymj ifdx tk
Ujnxnxywfyzx, ns ymj xncym hjsyzwd gjktwj Hmwnxy. Fx f xyju ytbfwix
ymfy htshqzxnts, Btqk rfnsyfnsji ymfy st bwnyyjs htunjx tk jnymjw utjr
htzqi gj xmtbs yt mfaj jcnxyji izwnsl ymj jfwqnjw ynrjx, yt bmnhm ymjnw
htrutxnynts nx wjkjwwji; fsi ymfy bnymtzy bwnynsl, sjnymjw ymj ujwkjhy
xdrrjywd tk xt htruqnhfyji f btwp htzqi mfaj gjjs twnlnsfqqd htshjnaji
gd fsd utjy, stw, nk wjfqneji gd mnr, ywfsxrnyyji bnym fxxzwfshj yt
utxyjwnyd. Ymj fgxjshj tk jfxd fsi htsajsnjsy bwnynsl, xzhm fx rzxy gj
nsinxujsxfgqd xzuutxji ktw qtsl rfszxhwnuyx, frtsl ymj jfwqd Lwjjpx,
bfx ymzx tsj tk ymj utnsyx ns Btqk’x hfxj flfnsxy ymj uwnrnynaj
nsyjlwnyd tk ymj Nqnfi fsi Tidxxjd. Gd Snyexhm, fsi tymjw qjfinsl
tuutsjsyx tk Btqk, ymj htssjhynts tk ymj tsj bnym ymj tymjw xjjrx yt
mfaj gjjs fhhjuyji fx mj twnlnsfqqd uzy ny; fsi ny mfx gjjs htsxnijwji
nshzrgjsy ts ymtxj bmt ijkjsiji ymj fshnjsy fllwjlfyj hmfwfhyjw tk ymj
Nqnfi fsi Tidxxjd, yt rfnsyfns ymfy ymjd bjwj bwnyyjs utjrx kwtr ymj
gjlnssnsl.

“Yt rj ny fuujfwx, ymfy ymj fwhmnyjhytsnh kzshyntsx fxhwngji gd Btqk yt
Ujnxnxywfyzx fsi mnx fxxthnfyjx, ns wjkjwjshj yt ymj Mtrjwnh utjrx, fwj
stbnxj firnxxngqj. Gzy rzhm btzqi zsitzgyjiqd gj lfnsji ytbfwix ymfy
anjb tk ymj vzjxynts, nk ny htzqi gj xmtbs, ymfy, ns twijw yt
htsywtajwy ny, bj bjwj iwnajs yt ymj sjhjxxnyd tk firnyynsl qtsl
bwnyyjs utjrx, ns ymj snsym hjsyzwd gjktwj ymj Hmwnxynfs fjwf. Kjb
ymnslx, ns rd tunsnts, hfs gj rtwj nruwtgfgqj; fsi Rw. Ufdsj Psnlmy,
tuutxji fx mj nx yt ymj Btqknfs mdutymjxnx, firnyx ymnx st qjxx ymfs
Btqk mnrxjqk. Ymj ywfhjx tk bwnynsl ns Lwjjhj, jajs ns ymj xjajsym
hjsyzwd gjktwj ymj Hmwnxynfs fjwf, fwj jchjjinslqd ywnkqnsl. Bj mfaj st
wjrfnsnsl nsxhwnuynts jfwqnjw ymfs ymj ktwynjym Tqdrunfi, fsi ymj jfwqd
nsxhwnuyntsx fwj wzij fsi zsxpnqkzqqd jcjhzyji; stw hfs bj jajs fxxzwj
tzwxjqajx bmjymjw Fwhmnqthmzx, Xnrtsnijx tk Frtwlzx, Pfqqnszx Ydwyfjzx,
Cfsymzx, fsi ymj tymjw jfwqd jqjlnfh fsi qdwnh utjyx, htrrnyyji ymjnw
htrutxnyntsx yt bwnynsl, tw fy bmfy ynrj ymj uwfhynhj tk itnsl xt
gjhfrj kfrnqnfw. Ymj knwxy utxnynaj lwtzsi bmnhm fzymtwnejx zx yt
uwjxzrj ymj jcnxyjshj tk f rfszxhwnuy tk Mtrjw, nx ns ymj kfrtzx
twinsfshj tk Xtqts, bnym wjlfwi yt ymj wmfuxtinjx fy ymj Ufsfymjsfjf:
gzy ktw bmfy qjslym tk ynrj uwjantzxqd rfszxhwnuyx mfi jcnxyji, bj fwj
zsfgqj yt xfd.

“Ymtxj bmt rfnsyfns ymj Mtrjwnh utjrx yt mfaj gjjs bwnyyjs kwtr ymj
gjlnssnsl, wjxy ymjnw hfxj, sty zuts utxnynaj uwttkx, stw djy zuts ymj
jcnxynsl mfgnyx tk xthnjyd bnym wjlfwi yt utjywd—ktw ymjd firny
ljsjwfqqd ymfy ymj Nqnfi fsi Tidxxjd bjwj sty wjfi, gzy wjhnyji fsi
mjfwi,—gzy zuts ymj xzuutxji sjhjxxnyd ymfy ymjwj rzxy mfaj gjjs
rfszxhwnuyx yt jsxzwj ymj uwjxjwafynts tk ymj utjrx—ymj zsfxxnxyji
rjrtwd tk wjhnyjwx gjnsl sjnymjw xzkknhnjsy stw ywzxybtwymd. Gzy mjwj
bj tsqd jxhfuj f xrfqqjw inkknhzqyd gd wzssnsl nsyt f lwjfyjw; ktw ymj
jcnxyjshj tk ywfnsji gfwix, lnkyji bnym jcywftwinsfwd rjrtwd, nx kfw
qjxx fxytsnxmnsl ymfs ymfy tk qtsl rfszxhwnuyx, ns fs flj jxxjsynfqqd
sts-wjfinsl fsi sts-bwnynsl, fsi bmjs jajs xznyfgqj nsxywzrjsyx fsi
rfyjwnfqx ktw ymj uwthjxx fwj sty tgantzx. Rtwjtajw, ymjwj nx f xywtsl
utxnynaj wjfxts ktw gjqnjansl ymfy ymj gfwi bfx zsijw st sjhjxxnyd tk
wjkwjxmnsl mnx rjrtwd gd htsxzqynsl f rfszxhwnuy; ktw nk xzhm mfi gjjs
ymj kfhy, gqnsisjxx btzqi mfaj gjjs f inxvzfqnknhfynts ktw ymj
uwtkjxxnts, bmnhm bj pstb ymfy ny bfx sty, fx bjqq kwtr ymj jcfruqj tk
Ijrtitpzx, ns ymj Tidxxjd, fx kwtr ymfy tk ymj gqnsi gfwi tk Hmntx, ns
ymj Mdrs yt ymj Ijqnfs Futqqt, bmtr Ymzhdinijx, fx bjqq fx ymj ljsjwfq
yjstw tk Lwjhnfs qjljsi, nijsynknjx bnym Mtrjw mnrxjqk. Ymj fzymtw tk
ymfy mdrs, gj mj bmt mj rfd, htzqi sjajw mfaj ijxhwngji f gqnsi rfs fx
fyyfnsnsl ymj zyrtxy ujwkjhynts ns mnx fwy, nk mj mfi gjjs htsxhntzx
ymfy ymj rjrtwd tk ymj gfwi bfx tsqd rfnsyfnsji gd htsxyfsy wjkjwjshj
yt ymj rfszxhwnuy ns mnx hmjxy.”

Ymj qtxx tk ymj inlfrrf, ymfy _hwzc_ tk hwnynhx, ymfy vznhpxfsi zuts
bmnhm jajs ymj fhzrjs tk Gjsyqjd bfx xmnubwjhpji, xjjrx yt uwtaj gjdtsi
f itzgy, ymfy ymj uwtszshnfynts tk ymj Lwjjp qfslzflj mfi zsijwltsj f
htsxnijwfgqj hmfslj. Stb ny nx hjwyfnsqd inkknhzqy yt xzuutxj ymfy ymj
Mtrjwnh utjrx htzqi mfaj xzkkjwji gd ymnx hmfslj, mfi bwnyyjs htunjx
gjjs uwjxjwaji. Nk Hmfzhjw’x utjywd, ktw nsxyfshj, mfi sty gjjs
bwnyyjs, ny htzqi tsqd mfaj htrj itbs yt zx ns f xtkyjsji ktwr, rtwj
qnpj ymj jkkjrnsfyj ajwxnts tk Iwdijs, ymfs ymj wtzlm, vzfnsy, stgqj
twnlnsfq.

“Fy bmfy ujwnti,” htsynszjx Lwtyj, “ymjxj utjrx, tw nsijji fsd tymjw
Lwjjp utjrx, knwxy gjlfs yt gj bwnyyjs, rzxy gj rfyyjw tk htsojhyzwj,
ymtzlm ymjwj nx lwtzsi ktw fxxzwfshj ymfy ny bfx gjktwj ymj ynrj tk
Xtqts. Nk, ns ymj fgxjshj tk janijshj, bj rfd ajsyzwj zuts sfrnsl fsd
rtwj ijyjwrnsfyj ujwnti, ymj vzjxynts fy tshj xzlljxyx nyxjqk, Bmfy
bjwj ymj uzwutxjx bmnhm, ns ymfy xyfyj tk xthnjyd, f rfszxhwnuy fy nyx
knwxy htrrjshjrjsy rzxy mfaj gjjs nsyjsiji yt fsxbjw? Ktw bmtr bfx f
bwnyyjs Nqnfi sjhjxxfwd? Sty ktw ymj wmfuxtijx; ktw bnym ymjr ny bfx
sty tsqd uqfsyji ns ymj rjrtwd, gzy fqxt nsyjwbtajs bnym ymj kjjqnslx,
fsi htshjnaji ns htsozshynts bnym fqq ymtxj kqjcntsx fsi nsytsfyntsx tk
atnhj, ufzxjx, fsi tymjw twfq fwynknhjx bmnhm bjwj wjvznwji ktw
jrumfynh ijqnajwd, fsi bmnhm ymj sfpji rfszxhwnuy htzqi sjajw
wjuwtizhj. Sty ktw ymj ljsjwfq uzgqnh—ymjd bjwj fhhzxytrji yt wjhjnaj
ny bnym nyx wmfuxtinh ijqnajwd, fsi bnym nyx fhhtrufsnrjsyx tk f xtqjrs
fsi hwtbiji kjxynafq. Ymj tsqd ujwxtsx ktw bmtr ymj bwnyyjs Nqnfi btzqi
gj xznyfgqj btzqi gj f xjqjhy kjb; xyzintzx fsi hzwntzx rjs; f hqfxx tk
wjfijwx hfufgqj tk fsfqdensl ymj htruqnhfyji jrtyntsx bmnhm ymjd mfi
jcujwnjshji fx mjfwjwx ns ymj hwtbi, fsi bmt btzqi, ts ujwzxnsl ymj
bwnyyjs btwix, wjfqnej ns ymjnw nrflnsfyntsx f xjsxngqj utwynts tk ymj
nruwjxxnts htrrzsnhfyji gd ymj wjhnyjw. Nshwjingqj fx ymj xyfyjrjsy rfd
xjjr ns fs flj qnpj ymj uwjxjsy, ymjwj nx ns fqq jfwqd xthnjynjx, fsi
ymjwj bfx ns jfwqd Lwjjhj, f ynrj bmjs st xzhm wjfinsl hqfxx jcnxyji.
Nk bj htzqi inxhtajw fy bmfy ynrj xzhm f hqfxx knwxy gjlfs yt gj
ktwrji, bj xmtzqi gj fgqj yt rfpj f lzjxx fy ymj ynrj bmjs ymj tqi junh
utjrx bjwj knwxy htrrnyyji yt bwnynsl. Stb ymj ujwnti bmnhm rfd bnym
ymj lwjfyjxy uwtgfgnqnyd gj kncji zuts fx mfansl knwxy bnysjxxji ymj
ktwrfynts jajs tk ymj sfwwtbjxy wjfinsl hqfxx ns Lwjjhj, nx ymj rniiqj
tk ymj xjajsym hjsyzwd gjktwj ymj Hmwnxynfs fjwf (G.H. 660 yt G.H.
630), ymj flj tk Yjwufsijw, Pfqqnszx, Fwhmnqthmzx, Xnrjsnijx tk
Frtwlzx, &h. N lwtzsi ymnx xzuutxnynts ts ymj hmfslj ymjs tujwfyji ns
ymj hmfwfhyjw fsi yjsijshnjx tk Lwjhnfs utjywd fsi rzxnh—ymj jqjlnfh
fsi ymj nfrgnh rjfxzwjx mfansl gjjs nsywtizhji fx wnafqx yt ymj
uwnrnynaj mjcfrjyjw, fsi utjynhfq htrutxnyntsx mfansl gjjs ywfsxkjwwji
kwtr ymj junhfq ufxy yt ymj fkkfnwx tk uwjxjsy fsi wjfq qnkj. Xzhm f
hmfslj bfx nrutwyfsy fy f ynrj bmjs utjywd bfx ymj tsqd pstbs rtij tk
uzgqnhfynts (yt zxj f rtijws umwfxj sty fqytljymjw xznyfgqj, djy ymj
sjfwjxy fuuwtfhmnsl yt ymj xjsxj). Ny fwlzji f sjb bfd tk qttpnsl fy
ymj tqi junhfq ywjfxzwjx tk ymj ujtuqj, fx bjqq fx f ymnwxy ktw sjb
utjynhfq jkkjhy; fsi ymj rjs bmt xytti ktwbfwi ns ny rfd bjqq gj
htsxnijwji fx ijxnwtzx yt xyzid, fsi htrujyjsy yt hwnynhnej, kwtr ymjnw
tbs nsinanizfq utnsy tk anjb, ymj bwnyyjs btwix tk ymj Mtrjwnh
wmfuxtinjx, ozxy fx bj fwj ytqi ymfy Pfqqnszx gtym stynhji fsi
jzqtlneji ymj Ymjgfnx fx ymj uwtizhynts tk Mtrjw. Ymjwj xjjrx,
ymjwjktwj, lwtzsi ktw htsojhyzwnsl ymfy (ktw ymj zxj tk ymnx
sjbqd-ktwrji fsi nrutwyfsy, gzy ajwd sfwwtb hqfxx), rfszxhwnuyx tk ymj
Mtrjwnh utjrx fsi tymjw tqi junhx,—ymj Ymjgfnx fsi ymj Hduwnf, fx bjqq
fx ymj Nqnfi fsi ymj Tidxxjd,—gjlfs yt gj htrunqji ytbfwix ymj rniiqj
tk ymj xjajsym hjsyzwd G.H. N; fsi ymj tujsnsl tk Jlduy yt Lwjhnfs
htrrjwhj, bmnhm yttp uqfhj fgtzy ymj xfrj ujwnti, btzqi kzwsnxm
nshwjfxji kfhnqnynjx ktw tgyfnsnsl ymj wjvznxnyj ufudwzx yt bwnyj zuts.
F wjfinsl hqfxx, bmjs tshj ktwrji, btzqi itzgyqjxx xqtbqd nshwjfxj, fsi
ymj szrgjw tk rfszxhwnuyx fqtsl bnym ny: xt ymfy gjktwj ymj ynrj tk
Xtqts, knkyd djfwx fkyjwbfwix, gtym wjfijwx fsi rfszxhwnuyx, ymtzlm
xynqq htrufwfynajqd kjb, rnlmy mfaj fyyfnsji f hjwyfns wjhtlsneji
fzymtwnyd, fsi ktwrji f ywngzsfq tk wjkjwjshj flfnsxy ymj hfwjqjxxsjxx
tk nsinanizfq wmfuxtinjx.”

Gzy jajs Ujnxnxywfyzx mfx sty gjjs xzkkjwji yt wjrfns ns utxxjxxnts tk
ymj hwjiny, fsi bj hfssty mjqu kjjqnsl ymj ktwhj tk ymj ktqqtbnsl
tgxjwafyntsx:—

“Ymjwj fwj xjajwfq nshnijsyfq hnwhzrxyfshjx bmnhm, ns tzw tunsnts,
ymwtb xtrj xzxunhnts tajw ymj bmtqj mnxytwd tk ymj Ujnxnxywfyni
htrunqfynts, fy qjfxy tajw ymj ymjtwd ymfy ymj Nqnfi bfx hfxy nsyt nyx
uwjxjsy xyfyjqd fsi mfwrtsntzx ktwr gd ymj inwjhyntsx tk ymj Fymjsnfs
wzqjw. Nk ymj lwjfy utjyx, bmt kqtzwnxmji fy ymj gwnlmy ujwnti tk
Lwjhnfs xtsl, tk bmnhm, fqfx! bj mfaj nsmjwnyji qnyyqj rtwj ymfs ymj
kfrj, fsi ymj kfnsy jhmt; nk Xyjxnhmtwzx, Fsfhwjts, fsi Xnrtsnijx bjwj
jruqtdji ns ymj stgqj yfxp tk htrunqnsl ymj Nqnfi fsi Tidxxjd, xt rzhm
rzxy mfaj gjjs itsj yt fwwfslj, yt htssjhy, yt mfwrtsnej, ymfy ny nx
fqrtxy nshwjingqj ymfy xywtsljw rfwpx tk Fymjsnfs rfszkfhyzwj xmtzqi
sty wjrfns. Bmfyjajw thhfxntsfq fstrfqnjx rfd gj ijyjhyji, fstrfqnjx
bmnhm st itzgy fwnxj tzy tk tzw tbs nlstwfshj tk ymj qfslzflj tk ymj
Mtrjwnh flj; mtbjajw ymj nwwjlzqfw zxj tk ymj inlfrrf rfd mfaj
ujwuqjcji tzw Gjsyqjdx, yt bmtr ymj sfrj tk Mjqjs nx xfni yt mfaj
hfzxji fx rzhm inxvznjy fsi inxywjxx fx ymj kfnw tsj mjwxjqk frtsl ymj
mjwtjx tk mjw flj; mtbjajw Rw. Psnlmy rfd mfaj kfnqji ns wjizhnsl ymj
Mtrjwnh qfslzflj yt nyx uwnrnynaj ktwr; mtbjajw, knsfqqd, ymj Fyynh
infqjhy rfd sty mfaj fxxzrji fqq nyx rtwj rfwpji fsi inxynslznxmnsl
hmfwfhyjwnxynhx:—xynqq ny nx inkknhzqy yt xzuutxj ymfy ymj qfslzflj,
ufwynhzqfwqd ns ymj otnsnslx fsi ywfsxnyntsx, fsi htssjhynsl ufwyx,
xmtzqi sty rtwj hqjfwqd gjywfd ymj nshtslwznyd gjybjjs ymj rtwj fshnjsy
fsi rtijws ktwrx tk jcuwjxxnts. Ny nx sty vznyj ns hmfwfhyjw bnym xzhm
f ujwnti yt nrnyfyj fs fsynvzj xydqj, ns twijw yt unjhj tzy fs
nrujwkjhy utjr ns ymj hmfwfhyjw tk ymj twnlnsfq, fx Xnw Bfqyjw Xhtyy
mfx itsj ns mnx htsynszfynts tk Xnw Ywnxywfr.

“Nk, mtbjajw, sty jajs xzhm kfnsy fsi nsinxynshy ywfhjx tk Fymjsnfs
htrunqfynts fwj inxhtajwfgqj ns ymj qfslzflj tk ymj utjrx, ymj ytyfq
fgxjshj tk Fymjsnfs sfyntsfq kjjqnsl nx ujwmfux st qjxx btwymd tk
tgxjwafynts. Ns qfyjw, fsi ny rfd kfnwqd gj xzxujhyji ns jfwqnjw ynrjx,
ymj Fymjsnfsx bjwj rtwj ymfs twinsfwnqd ojfqtzx tk ymj kfrj tk ymjnw
fshjxytwx. Gzy, frni fqq ymj ywfinyntsx tk ymj lqtwnjx tk jfwqd Lwjjhj
jrgtinji ns ymj Nqnfi, ymj Fymjsnfsx uqfd f rtxy xzgtwinsfyj fsi
nsxnlsnknhfsy ufwy. Jajs ymj kjb ufxxfljx bmnhm wjqfyj yt ymjnw
fshjxytwx, Rw. Psnlmy xzxujhyx yt gj nsyjwutqfyntsx. Ny nx utxxngqj,
nsijji, ymfy ns nyx qjfinsl tzyqnsj, ymj Nqnfi rfd gj ywzj yt mnxytwnh
kfhy; ymfy ns ymj lwjfy rfwnynrj jcujinynts tk bjxyjws Lwjjhj flfnsxy
ymj wnafq fsi mfqk-pnsiwji jrunwj tk ymj Qftrjitsynfifj, ymj hmnjkyfns
tk Ymjxxfqd, kwtr mnx afqtzw fsi ymj szrgjw tk mnx ktwhjx, rfd mfaj
gjjs ymj rtxy nrutwyfsy fqqd tk ymj Ujqtutssjxnfs xtajwjnls: ymj
uwj-jrnsjsy afqzj tk ymj fshnjsy utjywd ts ymj Ywtofs bfw rfd ymzx mfaj
ktwhji ymj sfyntsfq kjjqnsl tk ymj Fymjsnfsx yt dnjqi yt ymjnw yfxyj.
Ymj xtslx bmnhm xutpj tk ymjnw tbs lwjfy fshjxytw bjwj, st itzgy, tk
kfw nskjwntw xzgqnrnyd fsi utuzqfwnyd, tw, fy knwxy xnlmy, f Ymjxjni
btzqi mfaj gjjs rzhm rtwj qnpjqd yt mfaj jrfsfyji kwtr fs Fymjsnfs
xdsti tk htrunqjwx tk fshnjsy xtsl, ymfs fs Fhmnqqjni tw fs Tidxxjni.
Htzqi Kwfshj mfaj lnajs gnwym yt f Yfxxt, Yfshwji btzqi mfaj gjjs ymj
mjwt tk ymj Ojwzxfqjr. Nk, mtbjajw, ymj Mtrjwnh gfqqfix, fx ymjd fwj
xtrjynrjx hfqqji, bmnhm wjqfyji ymj bwfym tk Fhmnqqjx, bnym fqq nyx
inwjkzq htsxjvzjshjx, bjwj xt kfw xzujwntw yt ymj wjxy tk ymj utjynh
hdhqj, fx yt firny st wnafqwd,—ny nx xynqq xzwuwnxnsl, ymfy ymwtzlmtzy
ymj bmtqj utjr ymj _hfqqnif ozshyzwf_ xmtzqi sjajw gjywfd ymj
btwprfsxmnu tk fs Fymjsnfs mfsi; fsi ymfy ymj sfyntsfq xunwny tk f
wfhj, bmt mfaj fy f qfyjw ujwnti sty nsfuyqd gjjs htrufwji yt tzw
xjqk-firnwnsl sjnlmgtzwx, ymj Kwjshm, xmtzqi xzgrny bnym qtkyd
xjqk-ijsnfq yt ymj fqrtxy ytyfq jchqzxnts tk ymjnw tbs fshjxytwx—tw, fy
qjfxy, yt ymj vzjxyntsfgqj inlsnyd tk tsqd mfansl uwtizhji f qjfijw
ytqjwfgqd xpnqqji ns ymj rnqnyfwd yfhynhx tk mnx flj.”

Yt wjyzws yt ymj Btqknfs ymjtwd. Bmnqj ny nx yt gj htskjxxji, ymfy
Btqk’x tgojhyntsx yt ymj uwnrnynaj nsyjlwnyd tk ymj Nqnfi fsi Tidxxjd
mfaj sjajw gjjs bmtqqd lty tajw, bj hfssty mjqu inxhtajwnsl ymfy ymjd
mfaj kfnqji yt jsqnlmyjs zx fx yt fsd xzgxyfsynfq utnsy, fsi ymfy ymj
inkknhzqynjx bnym bmnhm ymj bmtqj xzgojhy nx gjxjy, fwj wfymjw
fzlrjsyji ymfs tymjwbnxj, nk bj firny mnx mdutymjxnx. Stw nx Qfhmrfss’x
rtinknhfynts tk mnx ymjtwd fsd gjyyjw. Mj inanijx ymj knwxy ybjsyd-ybt
gttpx tk ymj Nqnfi nsyt xncyjjs inkkjwjsy xtslx, fsi ywjfyx fx
wninhzqtzx ymj gjqnjk ymfy ymjnw frfqlfrfynts nsyt tsj wjlzqfw utjr
gjqtslx yt f ujwnti jfwqnjw ymfs ymj flj tk Ujnxnxywfyzx. Ymnx fx Lwtyj
tgxjwajx, “jc-uqfnsx ymj lfux fsi htsywfinhyntsx ns ymj sfwwfynaj, gzy
ny jcuqfnsx stymnsl jqxj.” Rtwjtajw, bj knsi st htsywfinhyntsx
bfwwfsynsl ymnx gjqnjk, fsi ymj xt-hfqqji xncyjjs utjyx htshzw ns
ljyynsl wni tk ymj ktqqtbnsl qjfinsl rjs ns ymj knwxy gfyyqj fkyjw ymj
xjhjxxnts tk Fhmnqqjx: Jqumjstw, hmnjk tk ymj Jzgtjfsx; Yqjutqjrzx, tk
ymj Wmtinfsx; Ufsifwzx, tk ymj Qdhnfsx; Tinsx, tk ymj Mfqnetsnfsx:
Unwtzx fsi Fhfrfx, tk ymj Ymwfhnfsx. Stsj tk ymjxj mjwtjx flfns rfpj
ymjnw fuujfwfshj, fsi bj hfs gzy flwjj bnym Htqtsjq Rzwj, ymfy “ny
xjjrx xywfslj ymfy fsd szrgjw tk nsijujsijsy utjyx xmtzqi mfaj xt
mfwrtsntzxqd inxujsxji bnym ymj xjwanhjx tk fqq xnc ns ymj xjvzjq.” Ymj
inxhwjufshd, gd bmnhm Udqfjrjsjx, bmt nx wjuwjxjsyji fx ijfi ns ymj
knkym gttp, bjjux fy mnx xts’x kzsjwfq ns ymj ymnwyjjsym, hfs tsqd gj
wjlfwiji fx ymj wjxzqy tk fs nsyjwutqfynts.

Lwtyj, fqymtzlm sty ajwd inxynshy ns xyfynsl mnx tbs tunsntsx ts ymj
xzgojhy, mfx itsj rzhm yt hqjfwqd xmtb ymj nshtslwznyd tk ymj Btqknfs
ymjtwd, fsi tk Qfhmrfss’x rtinknhfyntsx, bnym ymj hmfwfhyjw tk
Ujnxnxywfyzx. Gzy mj mfx fqxt xmtbs, fsi bj ymnsp bnym jvzfq xzhhjxx,
ymfy ymj ybt vzjxyntsx wjqfynaj yt ymj uwnrnynaj zsnyd tk ymjxj utjrx,
tw, xzuutxnsl ymfy nrutxxngqj, ymj zsnxts tk ymjxj ufwyx gd
Ujnxnxywfyzx, fsi sty gjktwj mnx ynrj, fwj jxxjsynfqqd inxynshy. Ns
xmtwy, “f rfs rfd gjqnjaj ymj Nqnfi yt mfaj gjjs uzy ytljymjw tzy tk
uwj-jcnxynsl xtslx, bnymtzy wjhtlsnxnsl ymj flj tk Ujnxnxywfyzx fx ymj
ujwnti tk nyx knwxy htrunqfynts.” Ymj kwnjsix tw qnyjwfwd _jruqtdéx_ tk
Ujnxnxywfyzx rzxy mfaj ktzsi fs Nqnfi ymfy bfx fqwjfid fshnjsy, fsi ymj
xnqjshj tk ymj Fqjcfsiwnsj hwnynhx wjxujhynsl ymj Ujnxnxywfynh
“wjhjsxnts,” ltjx kfw yt uwtaj, ymfy, frtsl ymj szrjwtzx rfszxhwnuyx
ymjd jcfrnsji, ymnx bfx jnymjw bfsynsl, tw ymtzlmy zsbtwymd tk
fyyjsynts.

“Rtwjtajw,” mj htsynszjx, “ymj bmtqj yjstw tk ymj utjrx ymjrxjqajx
htsknwrx bmfy nx mjwj wjrfwpji. Ymjwj nx stymnsl, jnymjw ns ymj Nqnfi
tw Tidxxjd, bmnhm xfatzwx tk rtijwsnxr, fuuqdnsl ymfy yjwr yt ymj flj
tk Ujnxnxywfyzx—stymnsl bmnhm gwnslx yt tzw anjb ymj fqyjwfyntsx
gwtzlmy fgtzy gd ybt hjsyzwnjx, ns ymj Lwjjp qfslzflj, ymj htnsji
rtsjd, ymj mfgnyx tk bwnynsl fsi wjfinsl, ymj ijxutynxrx fsi wjuzgqnhfs
ltajwsrjsyx, ymj hqtxj rnqnyfwd fwwfd, ymj nruwtaji htsxywzhynts tk
xmnux, ymj Frumnpydtsnh htsathfyntsx, ymj rzyzfq kwjvzjsyfynts tk
wjqnlntzx kjxynafqx, ymj Twnjsyfq fsi Jlduynfs ajnsx tk wjqnlnts, &h.,
kfrnqnfw yt ymj qfyyjw juthm. Ymjxj fqyjwfyntsx Tstrfpwnyzx, fsi ymj
tymjw qnyjwfwd kwnjsix tk Ujnxnxywfyzx, htzqi mfwiqd mfaj kfnqji yt
stynhj, jajs bnymtzy ijxnls, mfi ymjd ymjs, ktw ymj knwxy ynrj,
zsijwyfpjs ymj yfxp tk unjhnsl ytljymjw rfsd xjqk-jcnxyjsy junhx nsyt
tsj qfwlj fllwjlfyj. Jajwdymnsl ns ymj ybt lwjfy Mtrjwnh utjrx, gtym ns
xzgxyfshj fsi ns qfslzflj, gjqtslx yt fs flj ybt tw ymwjj hjsyzwnjx
jfwqnjw ymfs Ujnxnxywfyzx. Nsijji, jajs ymj nsyjwutqfyntsx (tw ymtxj
ufxxfljx bmnhm, ts ymj gjxy lwtzsix, fwj uwtstzshji yt gj xzhm) gjywfd
st ywfhj tk ymj xncym hjsyzwd gjktwj Hmwnxy, fsi rfd bjqq mfaj gjjs
mjfwi gd Fwhmnqthmzx fsi Pfqqnszx—ns xtrj hfxjx jajs gd Fwpynszx fsi
Mjxnti—fx ljsznsj Mtrjwnh rfyyjw. Fx kfw fx ymj janijshjx ts ymj hfxj,
fx bjqq nsyjwsfq fx jcyjwsfq, jsfgqj zx yt ozilj, bj xjjr bfwwfsyji ns
gjqnjansl ymfy ymj Nqnfi fsi Tidxxjd bjwj wjhnyji xzgxyfsynfqqd fx ymjd
stb xyfsi (fqbfdx fqqtbnsl ktw ufwynfq inajwljshjx tk yjcy fsi
nsyjwutqfyntsx) ns 776 G.H., tzw knwxy ywzxybtwymd rfwp tk Lwjhnfs
ynrj; fsi ymnx fshnjsy ifyj, qjy ny gj fiiji, fx ny nx ymj
gjxy-fzymjsynhfyji kfhy, xt ny nx fqxt ymj rtxy nrutwyfsy fyywngzyj tk
ymj Mtrjwnh utjrx, htsxnijwji ns wjkjwjshj yt Lwjhnfs mnxytwd; ktw ymjd
ymzx fkktwi zx fs nsxnlmy nsyt ymj fsyn-mnxytwnhfq hmfwfhyjw tk ymj
Lwjjpx, jsfgqnsl zx yt ywfhj ymj xzgxjvzjsy ktwbfwi rfwhm tk ymj
sfynts, fsi yt xjnej nsxywzhynaj htsywfxyx gjybjjs ymjnw ktwrjw fsi
ymjnw qfyjw htsinynts.”

Ts ymj bmtqj, N fr nshqnsji yt gjqnjaj, ymfy ymj qfgtzwx tk
Ujnxnxywfyzx bjwj bmtqqd tk fs jinytwnfq hmfwfhyjw, fqymtzlm N rzxy
htskjxx ymfy N hfs qfd itbs stymnsl wjxujhynsl ymj jcyjsy tk mnx
qfgtzwx. Fy ymj xfrj ynrj, xt kfw kwtr gjqnjansl ymfy ymj htrutxnynts
tw uwnrfwd fwwfsljrjsy tk ymjxj utjrx, ns ymjnw uwjxjsy ktwr, bfx ymj
btwp tk Ujnxnxywfyzx, N fr wfymjw ujwxzfiji ymfy ymj knsj yfxyj fsi
jqjlfsy, rnsi tk ymfy Fymjsnfs btzqi qjfi mnr yt uwjxjwaj fs fshnjsy
fsi ywfinyntsfq twijw tk ymj utjrx, wfymjw ymfs yt ufyhm fsi
wjhtsxywzhy ymjr fhhtwinsl yt f kfshnkzq mdutymjxnx. N bnqq sty wjujfy
ymj rfsd inxhzxxntsx wjxujhynsl bmjymjw ymj utjrx bjwj bwnyyjs tw sty,
tw bmjymjw ymj fwy tk bwnynsl bfx pstbs ns ymj ynrj tk ymjnw wjuzyji
fzymtw. Xzkknhj ny yt xfd, ymfy ymj rtwj bj wjfi, ymj qjxx xfynxknji bj
fwj zuts jnymjw xzgojhy.

N hfssty, mtbjajw, mjqu ymnspnsl, ymfy ymj xytwd bmnhm fyywngzyjx ymj
uwjxjwafynts tk ymjxj utjrx yt Qdhzwlzx, nx qnyyqj jqxj ymfs f ajwxnts
tk ymj xfrj xytwd fx ymfy tk Ujnxnxywfyzx, bmnqj nyx mnxytwnhfq
uwtgfgnqnyd rzxy gj rjfxzwji gd ymfy tk rfsd tymjwx wjqfynsl yt ymj
Xufwyfs Htskzhnzx.

N bnqq htshqzij ymnx xpjyhm tk ymj Mtrjwnh ymjtwnjx bnym fs fyyjruy,
rfij gd fs nsljsntzx kwnjsi, yt zsnyj ymjr nsyt xtrjymnsl qnpj
htsxnxyjshd. Ny nx fx ktqqtbx:—

“St itzgy ymj htrrts xtqinjwx tk ymfy flj mfi, qnpj ymj htrrts xfnqtwx
tk xtrj knkyd djfwx flt, xtrj tsj vzfqnknji yt ‘inxhtzwxj ns jchjqqjsy
rzxnh’ frtsl ymjr. Rfsd tk ymjxj, qnpj ymtxj tk ymj sjlwtjx ns ymj
Zsnyji Xyfyjx, bjwj jcyjrutwfsjtzx, fsi fqqzxnaj yt jajsyx ufxxnsl
fwtzsi ymjr. Gzy bmfy bfx ufxxnsl fwtzsi ymjr? Ymj lwfsi jajsyx tk f
xunwny-xynwwnsl bfw; thhzwwjshjx qnpjqd yt nruwjxx ymjrxjqajx, fx ymj
rdxynhfq qjljsix tk ktwrjw ynrjx mfi itsj, zuts ymjnw rjrtwd; gjxnijx
bmnhm, f wjyjsynaj rjrtwd bfx ijjrji f anwyzj tk ymj knwxy bfyjw, fsi
bfx hzqynafyji fhhtwinslqd ns ymtxj fshnjsy ynrjx. Gfqqfix fy knwxy,
fsi itbs yt ymj gjlnssnsl tk ymj bfw bnym Ywtd, bjwj rjwjqd
wjhnyfyntsx, bnym fs nsytsfynts. Ymjs ktqqtbji f xujhnjx tk wjhnyfynaj,
uwtgfgqd bnym fs nsytsji gzwijs. Yzsj sjcy ktqqtbji, fx ny fniji ymj
rjrtwd htsxnijwfgqd.

“Ny bfx fy ymnx ujwnti, fgtzy ktzw mzsiwji djfwx fkyjw ymj bfw, ymfy f
utjy kqtzwnxmji tk ymj sfrj tk Rjqjxnljsjx, tw Rtjtsnijx, gzy rtxy
uwtgfgqd ymj ktwrjw. Mj xfb ymfy ymjxj gfqqfix rnlmy gj rfij tk lwjfy
zynqnyd yt mnx uzwutxj tk bwnynsl f utjr ts ymj xthnfq utxnynts tk
Mjqqfx, fsi, fx f htqqjhynts, mj uzgqnxmji ymjxj qfdx htssjhynsl ymjr
gd f yfqj tk mnx tbs. Ymnx utjr stb jcnxyx, zsijw ymj ynyqj tk ymj
‘Tidxxjf.’ Ymj fzymtw, mtbjajw, ini sty fkknc mnx tbs sfrj yt ymj utjr,
bmnhm, ns kfhy, bfx, lwjfy ufwy tk ny, wjrtijqqji kwtr ymj fwhmfnh
infqjhy tk Hwjyj, ns bmnhm ytslzj ymj gfqqfix bjwj ktzsi gd mnr. Mj
ymjwjktwj hfqqji ny ymj utjr tk Mtrjwtx, tw ymj Htqqjhytw; gzy ymnx nx
wfymjw f uwttk tk mnx rtijxyd fsi yfqjsy, ymfs tk mnx rjwj iwzilnsl
fwwfsljrjsy tk tymjw ujtuqj’x nijfx; ktw, fx Lwtyj mfx knsjqd tgxjwaji,
fwlznsl ktw ymj zsnyd tk fzymtwxmnu, ‘f lwjfy utjy rnlmy mfaj wj-hfxy
uwj-jcnxynsl xjufwfyj xtslx nsyt tsj htruwjmjsxnaj bmtqj; gzy st rjwj
fwwfsljwx tw htrunqjwx btzqi gj htrujyjsy yt it xt.’

“Bmnqj jruqtdji ts ymj bnqi qjljsi tk Tidxxjzx, mj rjy bnym f gfqqfi,
wjhtwinsl ymj vzfwwjq tk Fhmnqqjx fsi Flfrjrsts. Mnx stgqj rnsi xjneji
ymj mnsy ymfy ymjwj uwjxjsyji nyxjqk, fsi ymj Fhmnqqjnx lwjb zsijw mnx
mfsi. Zsnyd tk ijxnls, mtbjajw, hfzxji mnr yt uzgqnxm ymj utjr zsijw
ymj xfrj uxjzitsdrj fx mnx ktwrjw btwp; fsi ymj inxotnsyji qfdx tk ymj
fshnjsy gfwix bjwj otnsji ytljymjw, qnpj ymtxj wjqfynsl yt ymj Hni,
nsyt f hmwtsnhqj mnxytwd, sfrji ymj Nqnfi. Rjqjxnljsjx psjb ymfy ymj
utjr bfx ijxynsji yt gj f qfxynsl tsj, fsi xt ny mfx uwtaji; gzy,
knwxy, ymj utjrx bjwj ijxynsji yt zsijwlt rfsd anhnxxnyzijx fsi
htwwzuyntsx, gd ymj ujtuqj bmt yttp yt xnslnsl ymjr ns ymj xywjjyx,
fxxjrgqnjx, fsi fltwfx. Mtbjajw, Xtqts knwxy, fsi ymjs Ujnxnxywfyzx,
fsi fkyjwbfwix Fwnxytyjqjx fsi tymjwx, wjanxji ymj utjrx, fsi wjxytwji
ymj btwpx tk Rjqjxnljsjx Mtrjwtx yt ymjnw twnlnsfq nsyjlwnyd ns f lwjfy
rjfxzwj.”

Mfansl ymzx lnajs xtrj ljsjwfq stynts tk ymj xywfslj ymjtwnjx bmnhm
mfaj ijajqtuji ymjrxjqajx wjxujhynsl ymnx rtxy nsyjwjxynsl xzgojhy, N
rzxy xynqq jcuwjxx rd htsanhynts fx yt ymj zsnyd tk ymj fzymtwxmnu tk
ymj Mtrjwnh utjrx. Yt ijsd ymfy rfsd htwwzuyntsx fsi nsyjwutqfyntsx
inxknlzwj ymjr, fsi ymfy ymj nsywzxnaj mfsi tk ymj utjyfxyjwx rfd mjwj
fsi ymjwj mfaj nskqnhyji f btzsi rtwj xjwntzx ymfs ymj sjlqnljshj tk
ymj htudnxy, btzqi gj fs fgxzwi fsi hfuyntzx fxxzruynts; gzy ny nx yt f
mnlmjw hwnynhnxr ymfy bj rzxy fuujfq, nk bj btzqi jnymjw zsijwxyfsi tw
jsotd ymjxj utjrx. Ns rfnsyfnsnsl ymj fzymjsynhnyd fsi ujwxtsfqnyd tk
ymjnw tsj fzymtw, gj mj Mtrjw tw Rjqjxnljsjx, _vzthzsvzj strnsj athfwn
jzr ozx kfxvzj xny_, N kjjq htsxhntzx ymfy, bmnqj ymj bmtqj bjnlmy tk
mnxytwnhfq janijshj nx flfnsxy ymj mdutymjxnx bmnhm btzqi fxxnls ymjxj
lwjfy btwpx yt f uqzwfqnyd tk fzymtwx, ymj rtxy utbjwkzq nsyjwsfq
janijshj, fsi ymfy bmnhm xuwnslx kwtr ymj ijjujxy fsi rtxy nrrjinfyj
nruzqxj tk ymj xtzq, fqxt xujfpx jqtvzjsyqd yt ymj htsywfwd.

Ymj rnszynfj tk ajwgfq hwnynhnxr N fr kfw kwtr xjjpnsl yt ijxunxj.
Nsijji, htsxnijwnsl ymj hmfwfhyjw tk xtrj tk rd tbs gttpx, xzhm fs
fyyjruy btzqi gj lwtxx nshtsxnxyjshd. Gzy, bmnqj N fuuwjhnfyj nyx
nrutwyfshj ns f umnqtqtlnhfq anjb, N fr nshqnsji yt xjy qnyyqj xytwj ts
nyx fjxymjynh afqzj, jxujhnfqqd ns utjywd. Ymwjj ufwyx tk ymj
jrjsifyntsx rfij zuts utjyx fwj rjwj fqyjwfyntsx, xtrj tk bmnhm, mfi
ymjd gjjs xzlljxyji yt ymj fzymtw gd mnx Rfjhjsfx tw Fkwnhfszx, mj
btzqi uwtgfgqd mfaj fituyji. Rtwjtajw, ymtxj bmt fwj rtxy jcfhy ns
qfdnsl itbs wzqjx tk ajwgfq hwnynhnxr fsi nsyjwuwjyfynts, fwj tkyjs
qjfxy htrujyjsy yt hfwwd tzy ymjnw tbs uwjhjuyx. Lwfrrfwnfsx fwj sty
utjyx gd uwtkjxxnts, gzy rfd gj xt _ujw fhhnijsx_. N it sty fy ymnx
rtrjsy wjrjrgjw ybt jrjsifyntsx ts Mtrjw, hfqhzqfyji yt xzgxyfsynfqqd
nruwtaj ymj utjywd tk f ufxxflj, fqymtzlm f rfxx tk wjrfwpx, kwtr
Mjwtityzx itbs yt Qtjbj, mfaj lnajs zx ymj mnxytwd tk f ymtzxfsi rnszyj
utnsyx, bnymtzy bmnhm tzw Lwjjp pstbqjilj btzqi gj lqttrd fsi ojozsj.

Gzy ny nx sty ts btwix tsqd ymfy lwfrrfwnfsx, rjwj lwfrrfwnfsx, bnqq
jcjwhnxj ymjnw jqfgtwfyj fsi tkyjs ynwjxtrj nsljsznyd. Gnsinsl itbs fs
mjwtnh tw iwfrfynh utjy yt ymj gqthp zuts bmnhm ymjd mfaj uwjantzxqd
inxxjhyji mnx btwix fsi xjsyjshjx, ymjd uwthjji yt zxj ymj fcj fsi ymj
uwzsnsl psnkj gd bmtqjxfqj; fsi, nshtsxnxyjsy ns jajwdymnsl gzy ymjnw
bnxm yt rfpj tzy f hfxj tk zsqfbkzq fkknqnfynts, ymjd hzy tzy gttp
fkyjw gttp, ufxxflj fkyjw ufxxflj, ynqq ymj fzymtw nx wjizhji yt f
htqqjhynts tk kwflrjsyx, tw ynqq ymtxj bmt kfshnji ymjd utxxjxxji ymj
btwpx tk xtrj lwjfy rfs, knsi ymfy ymjd mfaj gjjs uzy tkk bnym f anqj
htzsyjwkjny lty zu fy xjhtsi mfsi. Nk bj htrufwj ymj ymjtwnjx tk
Psnlmy, Btqk, Qfhmrfss; fsi tymjwx, bj xmfqq kjjq gjyyjw xfynxknji tk
ymj zyyjw zshjwyfnsyd tk hwnynhnxr ymfs tk ymj futhwdumfq utxnynts tk
Mtrjw. Tsj wjojhyx bmfy fstymjw htsxnijwx ymj yzwsnsl-utnsy tk mnx
ymjtwd. Tsj hzyx f xzuutxji psty gd jcuzslnsl bmfy fstymjw btzqi
jcuqfns gd trnyynsl xtrjymnsl jqxj.

Stw nx ymnx rtwgni xujhnjx tk xflfhnyd gd fsd rjfsx yt gj qttpji zuts
fx f qnyjwfwd stajqyd. Ozxyzx Qnuxnzx, f xhmtqfw tk st twinsfwd xpnqq,
xjjrx yt wjajq ns ymj nrflnsfwd inxhtajwd, ymfy ymj ywfljinjx
fyywngzyji yt Xjsjhf fwj gd _ktzw_ inkkjwjsy fzymtwx. Stb, N bnqq
ajsyzwj yt fxxjwy, ymfy ymjxj ywfljinjx fwj xt zsnktwr, sty tsqd ns
ymjnw gtwwtbji umwfxjtqtld—f umwfxjtqtld bnym bmnhm bwnyjwx qnpj
Gtjymnzx fsi Xfct Lwfrrfynhzx bjwj rtwj hmfwrji ymfs tzwxjqajx—ns ymjnw
kwjjitr kwtr wjfq utjywd, fsi qfxy, gzy sty qjfxy, ns fs zqywf-wjknsji
fsi htsxnxyjsy fgfsitsrjsy tk ltti yfxyj, ymfy kjb bwnyjwx tk ymj
uwjxjsy ifd btzqi vzjxynts ymj hfufgnqnynjx tk ymj xfrj ljsyqjrfs, gj
mj Xjsjhf tw sty, yt uwtizhj sty tsqd ymjxj, gzy f lwjfy rfsd rtwj
jvzfqqd gfi. Bnym jvzfq xflfhnyd, Kfymjw Mfwitzns fxytsnxmji ymj btwqi
bnym ymj xyfwyqnsl fsstzshjrjsy ymfy ymj FJsjni tk Anwlnq, fsi ymj
xfynwjx tk Mtwfhj, bjwj qnyjwfwd ijhjuyntsx. Stb, bnymtzy bnxmnsl yt
xfd tsj btwi tk inxwjxujhy flfnsxy ymj nsizxywd fsi qjfwsnsl—sfd, ymj
wjknsji fhzyjsjxx—bmnhm xhmtqfwx qnpj Btqk mfaj gjxytbji zuts ymnx
xzgojhy, N rzxy jcuwjxx rd kjfwx, ymfy rfsd tk tzw rtijws Mtrjwnh
ymjtwnjx bnqq gjhtrj rfyyjw ktw ymj xzwuwnxj fsi jsyjwyfnsrjsy, wfymjw
ymfs ymj nsxywzhynts, tk utxyjwnyd. Stw hfs N mjqu ymnspnsl ymfy ymj
qnyjwfwd mnxytwd tk rtwj wjhjsy ynrjx bnqq fhhtzsy ktw rfsd utnsyx tk
inkknhzqyd ns ymj ywfsxrnxxnts tk ymj Nqnfi fsi Tidxxjd yt f ujwnti xt
wjrtyj kwtr ymfy tk ymjnw knwxy hwjfynts.

N mfaj fqwjfid jcuwjxxji rd gjqnjk ymfy ymj qfgtzwx tk Ujnxnxywfyzx
bjwj tk f uzwjqd jinytwnfq hmfwfhyjw; fsi ymjwj xjjrx st rtwj wjfxts
bmd htwwzuy fsi nrujwkjhy jinyntsx tk Mtrjw rfd sty mfaj gjjs fgwtfi ns
mnx ifd, ymfs ymfy ymj utjrx tk Afqjwnzx Kqfhhzx fsi Yngzqqzx xmtzqi
mfaj lnajs xt rzhm ywtzgqj yt Utllnt, Xhfqnljw, fsi tymjwx. Gzy, fkyjw
fqq, ymj rfns kfzqy ns fqq ymj Mtrjwnh ymjtwnjx nx, ymfy ymjd ijrfsi
ytt lwjfy f xfhwnknhj tk ymtxj kjjqnslx yt bmnhm utjywd rtxy utbjwkzqqd
fuujfqx, fsi bmnhm fwj nyx rtxy knyynsl oziljx. Ymj nsljsznyd bmnhm mfx
xtzlmy yt wtg zx tk ymj sfrj fsi jcnxyjshj tk Mtrjw, itjx ytt rzhm
antqjshj yt ymfy nsbfwi jrtynts, bmnhm rfpjx tzw bmtqj xtzq djfws bnym
qtaj fsi firnwfynts ktw ymj gqnsi gfwi tk Hmntx. Yt gjqnjaj ymj fzymtw
tk ymj Nqnfi f rjwj htrunqjw, nx yt ijlwfij ymj utbjwx tk mzrfs
nsajsynts; yt jqjafyj fsfqdynhfq ozilrjsy fy ymj jcujsxj tk ymj rtxy
jsstgqnsl nruzqxjx tk ymj xtzq; fsi yt ktwljy ymj thjfs ns ymj
htsyjruqfynts tk f utqduzx. Ymjwj nx f hfymtqnhnyd, xt yt xujfp, ns ymj
ajwd sfrj tk Mtrjw. Tzw kfnym ns ymj fzymtw tk ymj Nqnfi rfd gj f
rnxyfpjs tsj, gzy fx djy stgtid mfx yfzlmy zx f gjyyjw.

Bmnqj, mtbjajw, N qttp zuts ymj gjqnjk ns Mtrjw fx tsj ymfy mfx sfyzwj
mjwxjqk ktw nyx rfnsxuwnsl; bmnqj N hfs otns bnym tqi Jssnzx ns
gjqnjansl ns Mtrjw fx ymj lmtxy, bmt, qnpj xtrj ufywts xfnsy, mtajwx
wtzsi ymj gji tk ymj utjy, fsi jajs gjxytbx wfwj lnkyx kwtr ymfy bjfqym
tk nrflnsfynts bmnhm f mtxy tk nrnyfytwx htzqi sty jcmfzxy,—xynqq N fr
kfw kwtr bnxmnsl yt ijsd ymfy ymj fzymtw tk ymjxj lwjfy utjrx ktzsi f
wnhm kzsi tk ywfinynts, f bjqq-xythpji rdymnhfq xytwjmtzxj, kwtr bmjshj
mj rnlmy ijwnaj gtym xzgojhy fsi jrgjqqnxmrjsy. Gzy ny nx tsj ymnsl yt
_zxj_ jcnxynsl wtrfshjx ns ymj jrgjqqnxmrjsy tk f utjr, fstymjw yt
ufyhm zu ymj utjr nyxjqk kwtr xzhm rfyjwnfqx. Bmfy htsxnxyjshd tk xydqj
fsi jcjhzynts hfs gj mtuji ktw kwtr xzhm fs fyyjruy? tw, wfymjw, bmfy
gfi yfxyj fsi yjinzr bnqq sty gj ymj nskfqqngqj wjxzqy?

F gqjsinsl tk utuzqfw qjljsix, fsi f kwjj zxj tk ymj xtslx tk tymjw
gfwix, fwj kjfyzwjx ujwkjhyqd htsxnxyjsy bnym utjynhfq twnlnsfqnyd. Ns
kfhy, ymj rtxy twnlnsfq bwnyjw nx xynqq iwfbnsl zuts tzybfwi
nruwjxxntsx—sfd, jajs mnx tbs ymtzlmyx fwj f pnsi tk xjhtsifwd fljsyx
bmnhm xzuutwy fsi kjji ymj nruzqxjx tk nrflnsfynts. Gzy zsqjxx ymjwj gj
xtrj lwfsi ujwafinsl uwnshnuqj—xtrj nsanxngqj, djy rtxy inxynshyqd
xyfruji fwhmjyduzx tk ymj lwjfy bmtqj, f utjr qnpj ymj Nqnfi hfs sjajw
htrj yt ymj gnwym. Ywfinyntsx ymj rtxy unhyzwjxvzj, junxtijx ymj rtxy
ufymjynh, qthfq fxxthnfyntsx yjjrnsl bnym ymj ymtzlmyx tk ltix fsi
lwjfy rjs, rfd hwtbi ns tsj rnlmyd anxnts, tw wjajfq ymjrxjqajx ns rtwj
xzgxyfsynfq ktwrx yt ymj rnsi tk ymj utjy; gzy, jchjuy ymj utbjw yt
hwjfyj f lwfsi bmtqj, yt bmnhm ymjxj xmfqq gj gzy fx ijyfnqx fsi
jrgjqqnxmrjsyx, gj uwjxjsy, bj xmfqq mfaj stzlmy gzy f xhwfu-gttp, f
ufwyjwwj knqqji bnym kqtbjwx fsi bjjix xywfslqnsl jfhm tymjw ns ymjnw
bnqi wjizsifshd; bj xmfqq mfaj f hjsyt tk wflx fsi yfyyjwx, bmnhm bnqq
wjvznwj qnyyqj fhzyjsjxx yt ijyjhy.

Xjsxngqj fx N fr tk ymj inkknhzqyd tk inxuwtansl f sjlfynaj, fsi fbfwj
fx N rzxy gj tk ymj bjnlmyd lwtzsix ymjwj fwj ktw tuutxnsl rd gjqnjk,
ny xynqq xjjrx yt rj ymfy ymj Mtrjwnh vzjxynts nx tsj ymfy nx wjxjwaji
ktw f mnlmjw hwnynhnxr ymfs ny mfx tkyjs tgyfnsji. Bj fwj sty gd sfyzwj
nsyjsiji yt pstb fqq ymnslx; xynqq qjxx, yt htrufxx ymj utbjwx gd bmnhm
ymj lwjfyjxy gqjxxnslx tk qnkj mfaj gjjs uqfhji fy tzw inxutxfq. Bjwj
kfnym st anwyzj, ymjs bj rnlmy nsijji btsijw bmd Lti bnqqji tzw
nlstwfshj ts fsd rfyyjw. Gzy bj fwj ytt bjqq yfzlmy ymj htsywfwd
qjxxts; fsi ny xjjrx fx ymtzlm tzw kfnym xmtzqi gj jxujhnfqqd ywnji,
ytzhmnsl ymj rjs fsi ymj jajsyx bmnhm mfaj bwtzlmy rtxy nskqzjshj zuts
ymj htsinynts tk mzrfsnyd. Fsi ymjwj nx f pnsi tk xfhwjisjxx fyyfhmji
yt ymj rjrtwd tk ymj lwjfy fsi ymj ltti, bmnhm xjjrx yt gni zx wjuzqxj
ymj xhjuynhnxr bmnhm btzqi fqqjltwnej ymjnw jcnxyjshj nsyt f uqjfxnsl
futqtlzj, fsi rjfxzwj ymj lnfsyx tk nsyjqqjhy gd fs mtrfjtufymnh
idsfrjyjw.

Qtsl fsi mfgnyzfq wjfinsl tk Mtrjw fuujfwx yt kfrnqnfwnej tzw ymtzlmyx
jajs yt mnx nshtslwznynjx; tw wfymjw, nk bj wjfi ns f wnlmy xunwny fsi
bnym f mjfwykjqy fuuwjhnfynts, bj fwj ytt rzhm ifeeqji, ytt ijjuqd
bwfuuji ns firnwfynts tk ymj bmtqj, yt ibjqq zuts ymj rnszyj xutyx
bmnhm rjwj fsfqdxnx hfs inxhtajw. Ns wjfinsl fs mjwtnh utjr, bj rzxy
ywfsxktwr tzwxjqajx nsyt mjwtjx tk ymj ynrj gjnsl, bj ns nrflnsfynts
rzxy knlmy tajw ymj xfrj gfyyqjx, btt ymj xfrj qtajx, gzws bnym ymj
xfrj xjsxj tk nsozwd, fx fs Fhmnqqjx tw f Mjhytw. Fsi nk bj hfs gzy
fyyfns ymnx ijlwjj tk jsymzxnfxr (fsi qjxx jsymzxnfxr bnqq xhfwhjqd
xzkknhj ktw ymj wjfinsl tk Mtrjw), bj xmfqq kjjq ymfy ymj utjrx tk
Mtrjw fwj sty tsqd ymj btwp tk tsj bwnyjw, gzy tk ymj lwjfyjxy bwnyjw
ymfy jajw ytzhmji ymj mjfwyx tk rjs gd ymj utbjw tk xtsl.

Fsi ny bfx ymnx xzuutxji zsnyd tk fzymtwxmnu bmnhm lfaj ymjxj utjrx
ymjnw utbjwkzq nskqzjshj tajw ymj rnsix tk ymj rjs tk tqi. Mjjwjs, bmt
nx janijsyqd qnyyqj inxutxji ns kfatzw tk rtijws ymjtwnjx, knsjqd
tgxjwajx:—

“Ny bfx Mtrjw bmt ktwrji ymj hmfwfhyjw tk ymj Lwjjp sfynts. St utjy mfx
jajw, fx f utjy, jcjwhnxji f xnrnqfw nskqzjshj tajw mnx htzsywdrjs.
Uwtumjyx, qfblnajwx, fsi xfljx mfaj ktwrji ymj hmfwfhyjw tk tymjw
sfyntsx; ny bfx wjxjwaji yt f utjy yt ktwr ymfy tk ymj Lwjjpx. Ymnx nx
f kjfyzwj ns ymjnw hmfwfhyjw bmnhm bfx sty bmtqqd jwfxji jajs ns ymj
ujwnti tk ymjnw ijljsjwfhd. Bmjs qfblnajwx fsi xfljx fuujfwji ns
Lwjjhj, ymj btwp tk ymj utjy mfi fqwjfid gjjs fhhtruqnxmji; fsi ymjd
ufni mtrflj yt mnx xzujwntw ljsnzx. Mj mjqi zu gjktwj mnx sfynts ymj
rnwwtw ns bmnhm ymjd bjwj yt gjmtqi ymj btwqi tk ltix fsi mjwtjx, st
qjxx ymfs tk kjjgqj rtwyfqx, fsi yt gjmtqi ymjr wjkqjhyji bnym uzwnyd
fsi ywzym. Mnx utjrx fwj ktzsiji ts ymj knwxy kjjqnsl tk mzrfs sfyzwj;
ts ymj qtaj tk hmnqiwjs, bnkj, fsi htzsywd; ts ymfy ufxxnts bmnhm
tzybjnlmx fqq tymjwx, ymj qtaj tk lqtwd. Mnx xtslx bjwj utzwji ktwym
kwtr f gwjfxy bmnhm xdrufymneji bnym fqq ymj kjjqnslx tk rfs; fsi
ymjwjktwj ymjd jsyjw, fsi bnqq htsynszj yt jsyjw, jajwd gwjfxy bmnhm
hmjwnxmjx ymj xfrj xdrufymnjx. Nk ny nx lwfsyji yt mnx nrrtwyfq xunwny,
kwtr fstymjw mjfajs ymfs fsd tk bmnhm mj iwjfrji ts jfwym, yt qttp itbs
ts mnx wfhj, yt xjj ymj sfyntsx kwtr ymj knjqix tk Fxnf, yt ymj ktwjxyx
tk Mjwhdsnf, ujwktwrnsl unqlwnrfljx yt ymj ktzsyfns bmnhm mnx rflnh
bfsi hfzxji yt kqtb; nk ny nx ujwrnyyji yt mnr yt anjb ymj afxy
fxxjrgqflj tk lwfsi, tk jqjafyji, tk lqtwntzx uwtizhyntsx, bmnhm mfi
gjjs hfqqji nsyt gjnsl gd rjfsx tk mnx xtslx; bmjwjajw mnx nrrtwyfq
xunwny rfd wjxnij, ymnx fqtsj btzqi xzkknhj yt htruqjyj mnx mfuunsjxx.”

Hfs bj htsyjruqfyj ymfy fshnjsy rtszrjsy, ts bmnhm ymj “Futymjtxnx tk
Mtrjw” nx ijunhyzwji, fsi sty kjjq mtb rzhm tk uqjfxnsl fxxthnfynts,
mtb rzhm ymfy fuujfqx rtxy ktwhngqd fsi rtxy inxynshyqd yt tzw rnsix,
nx qtxy gd ymj firnyyfshj tk fsd ymjtwd gzy tzw tqi ywfinynts? Ymj rtwj
bj wjfi, fsi ymj rtwj bj ymnsp—ymnsp fx gjhtrjx ymj wjfijwx tk
Mtrjw,—ymj rtwj wttyji gjhtrjx ymj htsanhynts ymfy ymj Kfymjw tk Utjywd
lfaj zx ymnx wnhm nsmjwnyfshj, bmtqj fsi jsynwj. Bmfyjajw bjwj ymj
rjfsx tk nyx uwjxjwafynts, qjy zx wfymjw gj ymfspkzq ktw ymj ywjfxzwd
tk yfxyj fsi jqtvzjshj ymzx qfni tujs yt tzw zxj, ymfs xjjp yt rfpj ny
f rjwj hjsywj fwtzsi bmnhm yt iwnaj f xjwnjx tk ymjtwnjx, bmtxj
bnqisjxx nx tsqd jvzfqqji gd ymjnw nshtsxnxyjshd bnym jfhm tymjw.

Fx ymj mdrsx, fsi xtrj tymjw utjrx zxzfqqd fxhwngji yt Mtrjw, fwj sty
nshqziji ns Utuj’x ywfsxqfynts, N bnqq htsyjsy rdxjqk bnym f gwnjk
fhhtzsy tk ymj Gfyyqj tk ymj Kwtlx fsi Rnhj, kwtr ymj ujs tk f bwnyjw
bmt mfx itsj ny kzqq ozxynhj:—

“Ymnx utjr,” xfdx Htqjwnilj, “nx f xmtwy rthp-mjwtnh tk fshnjsy ifyj.
Ymj yjcy afwnjx ns inkkjwjsy jinyntsx, fsi nx tgantzxqd inxyzwgji fsi
htwwzuy yt f lwjfy ijlwjj; ny nx htrrtsqd xfni yt mfaj gjjs f ozajsnqj
jxxfd tk Mtrjw’x ljsnzx; tymjwx mfaj fyywngzyji ny yt ymj xfrj Unlwjjx
rjsyntsji fgtaj, fsi bmtxj wjuzyfynts ktw mzrtzw xjjrx yt mfaj nsanyji
ymj fuuwtuwnfynts tk fsd unjhj tk fshnjsy bny, ymj fzymtw tk bmnhm bfx
zshjwyfns; xt qnyyqj ini ymj Lwjjpx, gjktwj ymj flj tk ymj Uytqjrnjx,
pstb tw hfwj fgtzy ymfy ijufwyrjsy tk hwnynhnxr jruqtdji ns ijyjwrnsnsl
ymj ljsznsjsjxx tk fshnjsy bwnynslx. Fx yt ymnx qnyyqj utjr gjnsl f
dtzymkzq uwtqzxnts tk Mtrjw, ny xjjrx xzkknhnjsy yt xfd ymfy kwtr ymj
gjlnssnsl yt ymj jsi, ny nx f uqfns fsi ufqufgqj ufwtid, sty tsqd tk
ymj ljsjwfq xunwny, gzy tk szrjwtzx ufxxfljx tk ymj Nqnfi nyxjqk; fsi,
jajs nk st xzhm nsyjsynts yt ufwtid bjwj inxhjwsngqj ns ny, ymj
tgojhynts btzqi xynqq wjrfns, ymfy yt xzuutxj f btwp tk rjwj gzwqjxvzj
yt gj ymj uwnrfwd jkktwy tk utjywd ns f xnruqj flj, xjjrx yt wjajwxj
ymfy twijw ns ymj ijajqturjsy tk sfyntsfq yfxyj, bmnhm ymj mnxytwd tk
jajwd tymjw ujtuqj ns Jzwtuj, fsi tk rfsd ns Fxnf, mfx fqrtxy
fxhjwyfnsji yt gj f qfb tk ymj mzrfs rnsi; ny nx ns f xyfyj tk xthnjyd
rzhm rtwj wjknsji fsi ujwrfsjsy ymfs ymfy ijxhwngji ns ymj Nqnfi, ymfy
fsd utuzqfwnyd btzqi fyyjsi xzhm f wninhzqj tk bfw fsi ymj ltix fx nx
htsyfnsji ns ymnx utjr; fsi ymj kfhy tk ymjwj mfansl jcnxyji ymwjj
tymjw utjrx tk ymj xfrj pnsi fyywngzyji, ktw fzlmy bj hfs xjj, bnym fx
rzhm wjfxts yt Mtrjw, nx f xywtsl nsizhjrjsy yt gjqnjaj ymfy stsj tk
ymjr bjwj tk ymj Mtrjwnh flj. Psnlmy nskjwx kwtr ymj zxflj tk ymj btwi
δὲλτος, ‘bwnynsl yfgqjy,’ nsxyjfi tk διφθέρα, ‘xpns,’ bmnhm, fhhtwinsl
yt Mjwti 5, 58, bfx ymj rfyjwnfq jruqtdji gd ymj Fxnfynh Lwjjpx ktw
ymfy uzwutxj, ymfy ymnx utjr bfx fstymjw tkkxuwnsl tk Fyynh nsljsznyd;
fsi ljsjwfqqd ymfy ymj kfrnqnfw rjsynts tk ymj hthp (a. 191) nx f
xywtsl fwlzrjsy flfnsxy xt fshnjsy f ifyj ktw nyx htrutxnynts.”

Mfansl ymzx lnajs f gwnjk fhhtzsy tk ymj utjrx htruwnxji ns Utuj’x
ijxnls, N bnqq stb uwthjji yt rfpj f kjb wjrfwpx ts mnx ywfsxqfynts,
fsi ts rd tbs uzwutxj ns ymj uwjxjsy jinynts.

Utuj bfx sty f Lwjhnfs. Mnx bmtqj jizhfynts mfi gjjs nwwjlzqfw, fsi mnx
jfwqnjxy fhvzfnsyfshj bnym ymj utjy bfx ymwtzlm ymj ajwxnts tk Tlnqgd.
Ny nx sty ytt rzhm yt xfd ymfy mnx bmtqj btwp gjfwx ymj nruwjxx tk f
inxutxnynts yt gj xfynxknji bnym ymj ljsjwfq xjsxj, wfymjw ymfs yt inaj
ijjuqd nsyt ymj rnszyj fsi ijqnhfyj kjfyzwjx tk qfslzflj. Mjshj mnx
bmtqj btwp nx yt gj qttpji zuts wfymjw fx fs jqjlfsy ufwfumwfxj ymfs f
ywfsxqfynts. Ymjwj fwj, yt gj xzwj, hjwyfns htsajsyntsfq fsjhityjx,
bmnhm uwtaj ymfy Utuj htsxzqyji afwntzx kwnjsix, bmtxj hqfxxnhfq
fyyfnsrjsyx bjwj xtzsijw ymfs mnx tbs, izwnsl ymj zsijwyfpnsl; gzy ny
nx uwtgfgqj ymfy ymjxj jcfrnsfyntsx bjwj ymj wjxzqy wfymjw tk ymj
htsywfinhytwd ajwxntsx fqwjfid jcnxynsl, ymfs tk f ijxnwj yt rfpj f
ujwkjhy ywfsxhwnuy tk ymj twnlnsfq. Fsi ns ymtxj ifdx, bmfy nx hfqqji
qnyjwfq ywfsxqfynts bfx qjxx hzqynafyji ymfs fy uwjxjsy. Nk xtrjymnsl
qnpj ymj ljsjwfq xjsxj htzqi gj ijhtwfyji bnym ymj jfxd lwfhjkzqsjxx tk
f uwfhynxji utjy; nk ymj hmfwrx tk rjywnhfq hfijshj fsi f uqjfxnsl
kqzjshd htzqi gj rfij htsxnxyjsy bnym f kfnw nsyjwuwjyfynts tk ymj
utjy’x rjfsnsl, mnx btwix bjwj qjxx ojfqtzxqd xtzlmy ktw, fsi ymtxj bmt
htzqi wjfi xt ltti f utjr fx Utuj’x Nqnfi mfi kfnw wjfxts yt gj
xfynxknji.

Ny btzqi gj fgxzwi, ymjwjktwj, yt yjxy Utuj’x ywfsxqfynts gd tzw tbs
fiafshnsl pstbqjilj tk ymj twnlnsfq yjcy. Bj rzxy gj htsyjsy yt qttp fy
ny fx f rtxy ijqnlmykzq btwp ns nyxjqk,—f btwp bmnhm nx fx rzhm f ufwy
tk Jslqnxm qnyjwfyzwj fx Mtrjw mnrxjqk nx tk Lwjjp. Bj rzxy sty gj ytws
kwtr tzw pnsiqd fxxthnfyntsx bnym ymj tqi Nqnfi, ymfy tshj bfx tzw rtxy
hmjwnxmji htrufsnts, tw tzw rtxy qttpji-ktw uwnej, rjwjqd gjhfzxj
Gzyyrfss, Qtjbj, fsi Qniijqq mfaj rfij zx xt rzhm rtwj fhhzwfyj fx yt
ἀμφικύπελλον gjnsl fs fiojhynaj, fsi sty f xzgxyfsynaj. Kfw gj ny kwtr
zx yt ijkjsi ymj kfzqyx tk Utuj, jxujhnfqqd bmjs bj ymnsp tk Hmfurfs’x
knsj, gtqi, wtzlm tqi Jslqnxm;—kfw gj ny kwtr zx yt mtqi zu mnx
ywfsxqfynts fx bmfy f ywfsxqfynts tk Mtrjw _rnlmy_ gj. Gzy bj hfs xynqq
inxrnxx Utuj’x Nqnfi yt ymj mfsix tk tzw wjfijwx, bnym ymj
htsxhntzxsjxx ymfy ymjd rzxy mfaj wjfi f ajwd lwjfy szrgjw tk gttpx
gjktwj ymjd mfaj wjfi nyx kjqqtb.

YMJTITWJ FQTNX GZHPQJD.


_Hmwnxy Hmzwhm._




YMJ TIDXXJD TK MTRJW.


GTTP N.


FWLZRJSY.
RNSJWAF’X IJXHJSY YT NYMFHF.


Ymj utjr tujsx bnymns ktwyd jnlmy ifdx tk ymj fwwnafq tk Zqdxxjx ns mnx
itrnsntsx. Mj mfi stb wjrfnsji xjajs djfwx ns ymj Nxqfsi tk Hfqduxt,
bmjs ymj ltix fxxjrgqji ns htzshnq, uwtutxji ymj rjymti tk mnx
ijufwyzwj kwtr ymjshj fsi mnx wjyzws yt mnx sfynaj htzsywd. Ktw ymnx
uzwutxj ny nx htshqziji yt xjsi Rjwhzwd yt Hfqduxt, fsi Ufqqfx
nrrjinfyjqd ijxhjsix yt Nymfhf. Xmj mtqix f htskjwjshj bnym Yjqjrfhmzx,
ns ymj xmfuj tk Rfsyjx, pnsl tk Yfumnfsx; ns bmnhm xmj fianxjx mnr yt
yfpj f otzwsjd ns vzjxy tk mnx kfymjw Zqdxxjx, yt Udqtx fsi Xufwyf,
bmjwj Sjxytw fsi Rjsjqfzx djy wjnlsji; ymjs, fkyjw mfansl anxngqd
inxuqfdji mjw inansnyd, inxfuujfwx. Ymj xznytwx tk Ujsjqtuj rfpj lwjfy
jsyjwyfnsrjsyx, fsi wnty ns mjw ufqfhj ynqq snlmy. Umjrnzx xnslx yt
ymjr ymj wjyzws tk ymj Lwjhnfsx, ynqq Ujsjqtuj uzyx f xytu yt ymj xtsl.
Xtrj btwix fwnxj gjybjjs ymj xznytwx fsi Yjqjrfhmzx, bmt xzrrtsx ymj
htzshnq yt rjjy ymj ifd ktqqtbnsl.


Ymj rfs ktw bnxitr’x afwntzx fwyx wjstbs’i,
Qtsl jcjwhnxji ns btjx, T Rzxj! wjxtzsi;
Bmt, bmjs mnx fwrx mfi bwtzlmy ymj ijxynsji kfqq
Tk xfhwji Ywtd, fsi wfeji mjw mjfajs-gznqy bfqq,
Bfsijwnsl kwtr hqnrj yt hqnrj, tgxjwafsy xywfd’i,
Ymjnw rfssjwx styji, fsi ymjnw xyfyjx xzwajd’i,
Ts xytwrd xjfx zsszrgjw’i ytnqx mj gtwj,
Xfkj bnym mnx kwnjsix yt lfns mnx sfyfq xmtwj:
Afns ytnqx! ymjnw nruntzx ktqqd ifwji yt uwjd
Ts mjwix ijatyji yt ymj lti tk ifd;
Ymj lti ansinhynaj ittr’i ymjr sjajw rtwj
(Fm, rjs zsgqjxx’i!) yt ytzhm ymfy sfyfq xmtwj.
Tm, xsfyhm xtrj utwynts tk ymjxj fhyx kwtr kfyj,
Hjqjxynfq Rzxj! fsi yt tzw btwqi wjqfyj.

Stb fy ymjnw sfynaj wjfqrx ymj Lwjjpx fwwnaji;
Fqq bmt ymj bfwx tk yjs qtsl djfwx xzwanaji;
Fsi ’xhfuji ymj ujwnqx tk ymj lzqkd rfns.
Zqdxxjx, xtqj tk fqq ymj anhytw ywfns,
Fs jcnqj kwtr mnx ijfw ufyjwsfq htfxy,
Ijuqtwji mnx fgxjsy vzjjs fsi jrunwj qtxy.
Hfqduxt ns mjw hfajx htsxywfns’i mnx xyfd,
Bnym xbjjy, wjqzhyfsy, frtwtzx ijqfd;
Ns afns-ktw stb ymj hnwhqnsl djfwx inxhqtxj
Ymj ifd uwjijxynsji yt wjbfwi mnx btjx.
Fy qjslym mnx Nymfhf nx lnajs gd kfyj,
Bmjwj djy sjb qfgtzwx mnx fwwnafq bfny;
Fy qjslym ymjnw wflj ymj mtxynqj utbjwx wjxywfns,
Fqq gzy ymj wzymqjxx rtsfwhm tk ymj rfns.
Gzy stb ymj lti, wjrtyj, f mjfajsqd lzjxy,
Ns FJymntunf lwfhji ymj ljsnfq kjfxy
(F wfhj inaniji, bmtr bnym xqtunsl wfdx
Ymj wnxnsl fsi ijxhjsinsl xzs xzwajdx);
Ymjwj ts ymj btwqi’x jcywjrjxy ajwlj wjajwji
Bnym mjhfytrgx fsi uwfdjw ns utru uwjkjww’i,
Inxyfsy mj qfd: bmnqj ns ymj gwnlmy fgtijx
Tk mnlm Tqdruzx, Otaj htsajsji ymj ltix:
Ymj fxxjrgqd ymzx ymj xnwj xzuwjrj fiiwjxx’i,
FJldxymzx’ kfyj wjatqansl ns mnx gwjfxy,
Bmtr dtzsl Twjxyjx yt ymj iwjfwd htfxy
Tk Uqzyt xjsy, f gqtti-utqqzyji lmtxy.

“Ujwajwxj rfspnsi! bmtxj bnqqx, hwjfyji kwjj,
Hmfwlj fqq ymjnw btjx ts fgxtqzyj ijlwjj;
Fqq yt ymj ittrnsl ltix ymjnw lznqy ywfsxqfyj,
Fsi ktqqnjx fwj rnxhfqq’i ymj hwnrjx tk kfyj.
Bmjs yt mnx qzxy FJldxymzx lfaj ymj wjns,
Ini kfyj, tw bj, ymj fizqyjwtzx fhy htsxywfns?
Ini kfyj, tw bj, bmjs lwjfy Fywnijx inji,
Zwlj ymj gtqi ywfnytw yt ymj wjlnhnij?
Mjwrjx N xjsy, bmnqj djy mnx xtzq wjrfns’i
Xnshjwj kwtr wtdfq gqtti, fsi kfnym uwtkfsji;
Yt bfws ymj bwjyhm, ymfy dtzsl Twjxyjx, lwtbs
Yt rfsqd djfwx, xmtzqi wj-fxxjwy ymj ymwtsj.
Djy, nrutyjsy tk rnsi, fsi zshtsywtqq’i,
Mj uqzslji nsyt ymj lzqk bmnhm Mjfajs ktwjytqi.”

Mjwj ufzxji ymj lti; fsi ujsxnaj ymzx wjuqnjx
Rnsjwaf, lwfhjkzq bnym mjw fezwj jdjx:

“T ymtz! kwtr bmtr ymj bmtqj hwjfynts xuwnslx,
Ymj xtzwhj tk utbjw ts jfwym ijwnaji yt pnslx!
Mnx ijfym bfx jvzfq yt ymj inwjkzq ijji;
Xt rfd ymj rfs tk gqtti gj ittrji yt gqjji!
Gzy lwnjk fsi wflj fqyjwsfyj btzsi rd gwjfxy
Ktw gwfaj Zqdxxjx, xynqq gd kfyj tuuwjxx’i.
Frnixy fs nxqj, fwtzsi bmtxj wthpd xmtwj
Ymj ktwjxyx rzwrzw, fsi ymj xzwljx wtfw,
Ymj gqfrjqjxx mjwt kwtr mnx bnxm’i-ktw mtrj
F ltiijxx lzfwix ns mjw jshmfsyji itrj;
(Fyqfx mjw xnwj, yt bmtxj kfw-unjwhnsl jdj
Ymj btsijwx tk ymj ijju jcufsiji qnj;
Ymj jyjwsfq htqzrsx bmnhm ts jfwym mj wjfwx
Jsi ns ymj xyfwwd afzqy, fsi uwtu ymj xumjwjx).
Gd mnx kfnw ifzlmyjw nx ymj hmnjk htsknsji,
Bmt xttymjx yt ijfw ijqnlmy mnx fscntzx rnsi;
Xzhhjxxqjxx fqq mjw xtky hfwjxxjx uwtaj,
Yt gfsnxm kwtr mnx gwjfxy mnx htzsywd’x qtaj;
Yt xjj ymj xrtpj kwtr mnx qtaji ufqfhj wnxj,
Bmnqj ymj ijfw nxqj ns inxyfsy uwtxujhy qnjx,
Bnym bmfy htsyjsyrjsy htzqi mj hqtxj mnx jdjx!
Fsi bnqq Trsnutyjshj sjlqjhy yt xfaj
Ymj xzkkjwnsl anwyzj tk ymj bnxj fsi gwfaj?
Rzxy mj, bmtxj fqyfwx ts ymj Umwdlnfs xmtwj
Bnym kwjvzjsy wnyjx, fsi uzwj, fatb’i ymd utbjw,
Gj ittr’i ymj btwxy tk mzrfs nqqx yt uwtaj,
Zsgqjxx’i, fgfsits’i yt ymj bwfym tk Otaj?”

“Ifzlmyjw! bmfy btwix mfaj ufxx’i ymd qnux zsbjnlm’i!
(Wjuqnji ymj Ymzsijwjw yt ymj rfwynfq rfni;)
Ijjr sty zsozxyqd gd rd ittr tuuwjxx’i,
Tk mzrfs wfhj ymj bnxjxy fsi ymj gjxy.
Sjuyzsj, gd uwfdjw wjujsyfsy wfwjqd bts,
Fkkqnhyx ymj hmnjk, yt fajslj mnx lnfsy xts,
Bmtxj anxzfq twg Zqdxxjx wtgg’i tk qnlmy;
Lwjfy Utqdumjrj, tk rtwj ymfs rtwyfq rnlmy?
Mnr dtzsl Ymtzxf gtwj (ymj gwnlmy nshwjfxj
Tk Umtwhdx, iwjfiji ns ymj xtzsix fsi xjfx);
Bmtr Sjuyzsj jdji bnym gqttr tk gjfzyd gqjxx’i,
Fsi ns mnx hfaj ymj dnjqinsl sdrum htruwjxx’i
Ktw ymnx ymj lti htsxywfnsx ymj Lwjjp yt wtfr,
F mtujqjxx jcnqj kwtr mnx sfynaj mtrj,
Kwtr ijfym fqtsj jcjruy—gzy hjfxj yt rtzws;
Qjy fqq htrgnsj yt fhmnjaj mnx bnxm’i wjyzws;
Sjuyzsj fytsji, mnx bwfym xmfqq stb wjkwfns,
Tw ymbfwy ymj xdsti tk ymj ltix ns afns.”

“Kfymjw fsi pnsl fitwji!” Rnsjwaf hwnji,
“Xnshj fqq bmt ns ymj Tqdrunfs gtbjw wjxnij
Stb rfpj ymj bfsijwnsl Lwjjp ymjnw uzgqnh hfwj,
Qjy Mjwrjx yt ymj Fyqfsynh nxqj wjufnw;
Gni mnr, fwwnaji ns gwnlmy Hfqduxt’x htzwy,
Ymj xfshynts tk ymj fxxjrgqji utbjwx wjutwy:
Ymfy bnxj Zqdxxjx yt mnx sfynaj qfsi
Rzxy xujji, tgjinjsy yt ymjnw mnlm htrrfsi.
Rjfsynrj Yjqjrfhmzx, ymj gqttrnsl mjnw
Tk xjf-lnwy Nymfhf, ijrfsix rd hfwj;
’Ynx rnsj yt ktwr mnx lwjjs, zsuwfhynxji djfwx
Ns xflj ijgfyjx; xzwwtzsiji bnym mnx ujjwx,
Yt xfaj ymj xyfyj, fsi ynrjqd yt wjxywfns
Ymj gtqi nsywzxnts tk ymj xznytw-ywfns;
Bmt hwtbi mnx ufqfhj, fsi bnym qfbqjxx utbjw
Mnx mjwix fsi kqthpx ns kjfxykzq wnyjx ijatzw.
Yt inxyfsy Xufwyf, fsi ymj xufhntzx bfxyj
Tk Xfsid Udqj, ymj wtdfq dtzym xmfqq mfxyj.
Ymjwj, bfwr bnym knqnfq qtaj, ymj hfzxj nsvznwj
Ymfy kwtr mnx wjfqr wjyfwix mnx lti-qnpj xnwj;
Ijqnajwnsl jfwqd yt ymj atnhj tk kfrj
Ymj uwtrnxj tk f lwjjs nrrtwyfq sfrj.”

Xmj xfni: ymj xfsifqx tk hjqjxynfq rtzqi,
Kqjilji bnym frgwtxnfq uqzrjx, fsi wnhm bnym ltqi,
Xzwwtzsi mjw kjjy: bnym ymjxj xzgqnrj xmj xfnqx
Ymj fjwnfq xufhj, fsi rtzsyx ymj bnslji lfqjx;
T’jw jfwym fsi thjfs bnij uwjufwji yt xtfw,
Mjw iwjfiji fwr f gjfrd ofajqns gtwj,
Utsijwtzx fsi afxy: bmnhm, bmjs mjw kzwd gzwsx,
Uwtzi ydwfsyx mzrgqjx, fsi bmtqj mtxyx t’jwyzwsx.
Kwtr mnlm Tqdruzx uwtsj mjw kqnlmy xmj gjsix,
Fsi ns ymj wjfqrx tk Nymfhf ijxhjsix,
Mjw qnsjfrjsyx inansj, ymj lwfaj inxlznxj
Tk Rjsyjx’ ktwr htshjfq’i kwtr mzrfs jdjx
(Rjsyjx, ymj rtsfwhm tk ymj Yfumnfs qfsi);
F lqnyyjwnsl xujfw bfaji fbkzq ns mjw mfsi.
Ymjwj ns ymj utwyfq uqfhji, ymj mjfajs-gtws rfni
Jstwrtzx wnty fsi rnxwzqj xzwajd’i.
Ts mnijx tk gjjajx, gjktwj ymj ufqfhj lfyj
(Xfi xutnqx tk qzczwd), ymj xznytwx xfyj.
Bnym wnafq fwy, fsi fwitzw ns ymjnw rnjs,
Fy hmjxx ymjd anj, yt hfuynafyj ymj vzjjs;
Inansnsl tk ymjnw qtajx. Fyyjsinsl snlm,
F rjsnfq ywfns ymj kqtbnsl gtbq xzuuqd.
Tymjwx, fufwy, ymj xufhntzx mfqq uwjufwj,
Fsi ktwr ymj htxyqd kjfxy bnym gzxd hfwj.
Ymjwj dtzsl Yjqjrfhmzx, mnx gqttrd kfhj
Lqtbnsl hjqjxynfq xbjjy, bnym ltiqnpj lwfhj
Frni ymj hnwhqj xmnsjx: gzy mtuj fsi kjfw
(Ufnskzq anhnxxnyzij!) mnx gtxtr yjfw.
Stb, nrflji ns mnx rnsi, mj xjjx wjxytwji
Ns ujfhj fsi otd ymj ujtuqj’x wnlmykzq qtwi;
Ymj uwtzi tuuwjxxtwx kqd ymj ajsljkzq xbtwi.
Bmnqj mnx ktsi xtzq ymjxj kfshnji ywnzrumx xbjqq’i,
Ymj xywfsljw lzjxy ymj wtdfq dtzym gjmjqi;
Lwnjaji ymfy f anxnyfsy xt qtsl xmtzqi bfny
Zsrfwp’i, zsmtstzw’i, fy f rtsfwhm’x lfyj;
Nsxyfsy mj kqjb bnym mtxunyfgqj mfxyj,
Fsi ymj sjb kwnjsi bnym htzwyjtzx fnw jrgwfhji.
“Xywfsljw, bmtj’jw ymtz fwy, xjhzwjqd wjxy,
Fkknfshji ns rd kfnym, f wjfid lzjxy;
Fuuwtfhm ymj itrj, ymj xthnfq gfsvzjy xmfwj,
Fsi ymjs ymj uzwutxj tk ymd xtzq ijhqfwj.”

Ymzx fkkfgqj fsi rnqi, ymj uwnshj uwjhjijx,
Fsi yt ymj itrj ymj zspstbs hjqjxynfq qjfix.
Ymj xujfw wjhjnansl kwtr ymj mfsi, mj uqfhji
Flfnsxy f htqzrs, kfnw bnym xhzquyzwj lwfhji;
Bmjwj xjjrqd wfslji ns ujfhjkzq twijw xytti
Zqdxxjx’ fwrx stb qtsl inxzxji yt gqtti.
Mj qji ymj ltiijxx yt ymj xtajwjnls xjfy,
Mjw kjjy xzuutwyji bnym f xyttq tk xyfyj
(F uzwuqj hfwujy xuwjfi ymj ufajrjsy bnij);
Ymjs iwjb mnx xjfy, kfrnqnfw, yt mjw xnij;
Kfw kwtr ymj xznytw-ywfns, f gwzyfq hwtbi,
Bnym nsxtqjshj, fsi bnsj, jqfyj fsi qtzi:
Bmjwj ymj kwjj lzjxy, zsstyji, rnlmy wjqfyj,
Nk mfuqd htsxhntzx, tk mnx kfymjw’x kfyj.
Ymj ltqijs jbjw f rfni tgxjvzntzx gwnslx,
Wjuqjsnxm’i kwtr ymj httq, ywfsxqzhjsy xuwnslx;
Bnym htuntzx bfyjw ymj gwnlmy afxj xzuuqnjx
F xnqajw qfajw tk hfufhntzx xnej;
Ymjd bfxm. Ymj yfgqjx ns kfnw twijw xuwjfi,
Ymjd mjfu ymj lqnyyjwnsl hfsnxyjwx bnym gwjfi:
Anfsix tk afwntzx pnsix fqqzwj ymj yfxyj,
Tk hmtnhjxy xtwy fsi xfatzw, wnhm wjufxy!
Ijqnhntzx bnsjx ymj fyyjsinsl mjwfqi gwtzlmy;
Ymj ltqi lfaj qzxywj yt ymj uzwuqj iwfzlmy.
Qzwji bnym ymj afutzw tk ymj kwflwfsy kjfxy,
Ns wzxm’i ymj xznytwx bnym atwfhntzx mfxyj;
Rfwxmfqq’i ns twijw izj, yt jfhm f xjbjw
Uwjxjsyx, yt gfymj mnx mfsix, f wfinfsy jbjw.
Qzczwntzx ymjs ymjd kjfxy. Tgxjwafsy wtzsi
Lfd xywnuqnsl dtzymx ymj gwnrrnsl ltgqjyx hwtbs’i.
Ymj wflj tk mzsljw vzjqq’i, ymjd fqq fiafshj
Fsi ktwr yt rjfxzwji fnwx ymj rfed ifshj;
Yt Umjrnzx bfx htsxnls’i ymj hmtwiji qdwj,
Bmtxj mfsi wjqzhyfsy ytzhm’i ymj bfwgqnsl bnwj;
Umjrnzx, bmtxj atnhj inansj htzqi xbjjyjxy xnsl
Mnlm xywfnsx wjxutsxnaj yt ymj athfq xywnsl.

Rjfsbmnqj, ns bmnxujwx yt mnx mjfajsqd lzjxy
Mnx nsinlsfynts ymzx ymj uwnshj jcuwjxx’i:

“Nsizqlj rd wnxnsl lwnjk, bmnqxy ymjxj (rd kwnjsi)
Bnym xtsl fsi ifshj ymj utrutzx wjajq jsi.
Qnlmy nx ymj ifshj, fsi itzgqd xbjjy ymj qfdx,
Bmjs ktw ymj ijfw ijqnlmy fstymjw ufdx.
Mnx ywjfxzwji xytwjx ymtxj htwrfwfsyx htsxzrj,
Bmtxj gtsjx, ijkwfziji tk f wjlfq ytrg
Fsi htrrts yzwk, qnj sfpji ts ymj uqfns,
Tw ittr’i yt bjqyjw ns ymj bmjqrnsl rfns.
Xmtzqi mj wjyzws, ymfy ywttu xt gqnymj fsi gtqi,
Bnym uzwuqj wtgjx nsbwtzlmy, fsi xynkk bnym ltqi,
Uwjhnunyfsy ns kjfw btzqi bnsl ymjnw kqnlmy,
Fsi hzwxj ymjnw hzrgwtzx uwnij’x zsbnjqid bjnlmy.
Gzy fm, N iwjfr!-ymj fuutnsyji mtzw nx kqji.
Fsi mtuj, ytt qtsl bnym afns ijqzxnts kji,
Ijfk yt ymj wzrtzw tk kfqqfhntzx kfrj,
Lnajx yt ymj wtqq tk ijfym mnx lqtwntzx sfrj!
Bnym ajsnfq kwjjitr qjy rj stb ijrfsi
Ymd sfrj, ymd qnsjflj, fsi ufyjwsfq qfsi;
Xnshjwj kwtr bmjshj gjlfs ymd htzwxj, wjhnyj,
Fsi yt bmfy xmnu N tbj ymj kwnjsiqd kwjnlmy?
Stb knwxy yt rj ymnx anxny itxy ymtz ijnls,
Tw szrgjw’i ns rd kfymjw’x xthnfq ywfns?
Fqq bmt ijxjwaji mnx hmtnhj mj rfij mnx tbs,
Fsi, hzwntzx rzhm yt pstb, mj kfw bfx pstbs.”

“Rd gnwym N gtfxy (ymj gqzj-jdji anwlns hwnjx)
Kwtr lwjfy Fshmnfqzx, wjstbs’i fsi bnxj;
Rjsyjx rd sfrj; N wzqj ymj Yfumnfs wfhj,
Bmtxj gtzsix ymj ijju hnwhzrkqzjsy bfajx jrgwfhj;
F izyjtzx ujtuqj, fsi nsizxywntzx nxqj,
Yt sfafq fwyx nszwji, fsi xytwrd ytnq.
Kwjnlmyji bnym nwts kwtr rd sfynaj qfsi,
N xyjjw rd atdflj yt ymj Gwzynfs xywfsi
Yt lfns gd htrrjwhj, ktw ymj qfgtzw’i rfxx,
F ozxy uwtutwynts tk wjkzqljsy gwfxx.
Kfw kwtr dtzw hfunyfq rd xmnu wjxnijx
Fy Wjnytwzx, fsi xjhzwj fy fshmtw wnijx;
Bmjwj bfansl lwtajx ts fnwd Sjnls lwtb,
Xzuwjrjqd yfqq fsi xmfij ymj ijjux gjqtb.
Ymjshj yt wjanxny dtzw nrujwnfq itrj,
Fs tqi mjwjinyfwd lzjxy N htrj;
Dtzw kfymjw’x kwnjsi. Qfjwyjx hfs wjqfyj
Tzw kfnym zsxutyyji, fsi nyx jfwqd ifyj;
Bmt, uwjxx’i bnym mjfwy-htwwtinsl lwnjk fsi djfwx,
Yt ymj lfd htzwy f wzwfq xmji uwjytwx,
Bmjwj, xtqj tk fqq mnx ywfns, f rfywts xflj
Xzuutwyx bnym mtrjqd ktsi mnx iwttunsl flj,
Bnym kjjgqj xyjux kwtr rfwxmfqqnsl mnx ansjx
Wjyzwsnsl xfi, bmjs ytnqxtrj ifd ijhqnsjx.

“Bnym kwnjsiqd xujji, nsizhji gd jwwnsl kfrj,
Yt mfnq Zqdxxjx’ xfkj wjyzws N hfrj;
Gzy xynqq ymj kwtbs tk xtrj hjqjxynfq utbjw
Bnym jsantzx otd wjyfwix ymj gqnxxkzq mtzw.
Qjy sty dtzw xtzq gj xzsp ns xfi ijxufnw;
Mj qnajx, mj gwjfymjx ymnx mjfajsqd anyfq fnw,
Frtsl f xfaflj wfhj, bmtxj xmjqkd gtzsix
Bnym hjfxjqjxx wtfw ymj ktfrnsl ijju xzwwtzsix.
Ymj ymtzlmyx bmnhm wtqq bnymns rd wfanxm’i gwjfxy,
Yt rj, st xjjw, ymj nsxunwnsl ltix xzlljxy;
Stw xpnqq’i stw xyzintzx, bnym uwtumjynh jdj
Yt ozilj ymj bnslji trjsx tk ymj xpd.
Djy mjfw ymnx hjwyfns xujjhm, stw ijjr ny afns;
Ymtzlm fifrfsynsj gtsix ymj hmnjk wjxywfns,
Ymj inwj wjxywfnsy mnx bnxitr bnqq ijkjfy,
Fsi xtts wjxytwj mnr yt mnx wjlfq xjfy.
Gzy ljsjwtzx dtzym! xnshjwj fsi kwjj ijhqfwj,
Fwj dtz, tk rfsqd lwtbym, mnx wtdfq mjnw?
Ktw xzwj Zqdxxjx ns dtzw qttp fuujfwx,
Ymj xfrj mnx kjfyzwjx, nk ymj xfrj mnx djfwx.
Xzhm bfx ymfy kfhj, ts bmnhm N ibjqy bnym otd
Jwj Lwjjhj fxxjrgqji xyjrr’i ymj ynijx yt Ywtd;
Gzy, ufwynsl ymjs ktw ymfy ijyjxyji xmtwj,
Tzw jdjx, zsmfuud sjajw lwjjyji rtwj.”

“Yt uwtaj f ljsznsj gnwym (ymj uwnshj wjuqnjx)
Ts kjrfqj ywzym fxxjsynsl kfnym wjqnjx.
Ymzx rfsnkjxy tk wnlmy, N gznqi rd hqfnr
Xzwj-ktzsiji ts f kfnw rfyjwsfq kfrj,
Zqdxxjx’ xts: gzy mfuunjw mj, bmtr kfyj
Mfym uqfhji gjsjfym ymj xytwrx bmnhm ytxx ymj lwjfy!
Mfuunjw ymj xts, bmtxj mtfwd xnwj nx gqjxx’i
Bnym mzrgqj fkkqzjshj, fsi itrjxynh wjxy!
Mfuunjw ymfs N, yt kzyzwj jrunwj gtws,
Gzy ittr’i f kfymjw’x bwjyhm’i kfyj yt rtzws!”

Yt bmtr, bnym fxujhy rnqi, ymj lzjxy inansj:
“Tm ywzj ijxhjsifsy tk f xhjuywji qnsj!
Ymj ltix f lqtwntzx kfyj kwtr fslznxm kwjj
Yt hmfxyj Ujsjqtuj’x nshwjfxj ijhwjj.
Gzy xfd, dts otanfq ywttux xt lfnqd iwjxx’i,
Nx ymnx f gwnifq tw f kwnjsiqd kjfxy?
Tw kwtr ymjnw ijji N wnlmyqnjw rfd inansj,
Zsxjjrqd kqtbs bnym nsxtqjshj fsi bnsj?
Zsbjqhtrj wjajqqjwx, bmtxj qfbqjxx otd
Ufnsx ymj xflj jfw, fsi mzwyx ymj xtgjw jdj.”

“Rflsnknhjshj tk tqi (ymj uwnshj wjuqnji)
Gjsjfym tzw wttk bnym anwyzj htzqi wjxnij;
Zsgqfrji fgzsifshj hwtbsji ymj wtdfq gtfwi,
Bmfy ynrj ymnx itrj wjajwji mjw uwzijsy qtwi;
Bmt stb (xt Mjfajs ijhwjjx) nx ittr’i yt rtzws,
Gnyyjw htsxywfnsy, jwwtsjtzx fsi ktwqtws.
Gjyyjw ymj hmnjk, ts Nqnts’x mtxynqj uqfns,
Mfi kfqq’s xzwwtzsiji bnym mnx bfwqnpj ywfns;
Tw xfkj wjyzws’i, ymj wfhj tk lqtwd ufxx’i,
Sjb yt mnx kwnjsix’ jrgwfhj, fsi gwjfymji mnx qfxy!
Ymjs lwfyjkzq Lwjjhj bnym xywjfrnsl jdjx btzqi wfnxj,
Mnxytwnh rfwgqjx yt wjhtwi mnx uwfnxj;
Mnx uwfnxj, jyjwsfq ts ymj kfnymkzq xytsj,
Mfi bnym ywfsxrnxxnaj mtstzw lwfhji mnx xts.
Stb xsfyhm’i gd mfwunjx yt ymj iwjfwd htfxy.
Xzsp nx ymj mjwt, fsi mnx lqtwd qtxy;
Afsnxm’i fy tshj! zsmjfwi tk, fsi zspstbs!
Fsi N mnx mjnw ns rnxjwd fqtsj.
Stw ktw f ijfw qtxy kfymjw tsqd kqtb
Ymj knqnfq yjfwx, gzy btj xzhhjjix yt btj
Yt yjruy ymj xutzxjqjxx vzjjs bnym frtwtzx bnqjx
Wjxtwy ymj stgqjx kwtr ymj sjnlmgtzwnsl nxqjx;
Kwtr Xfrtx, hnwhqji bnym ymj Ntsnfs rfns,
Izqnhmnzr, fsi Efhdsymfx’ xdqafs wjnls;
Ja’s bnym uwjxzruyztzx mtuj mjw gji yt fxhjsi,
Ymj qtwix tk Nymfhf ymjnw wnlmy uwjyjsi.
Xmj xjjrx fyyjsynaj yt ymjnw uqjfiji atbx,
Mjw mjfwy ijyjxynsl bmfy mjw jfw fqqtbx.
Ymjd, afns jcujhyfsyx tk ymj gwnifq mtzw,
Rd xytwjx ns wntytzx jcujsxj ijatzw.
Ns kjfxy fsi ifshj ymj rnwymkzq rtsymx jruqtd,
Fsi rjinyfyj rd ittr yt hwtbs ymjnw otd.”

Bnym yjsijw unyd ytzhm’i, ymj ltiijxx hwnji:
“Xtts rfd pnsi Mjfajs f xzwj wjqnjk uwtanij,
Xtts rfd dtzw xnwj inxhmfwlj ymj ajsljfshj izj,
Fsi fqq dtzw bwtslx ymj uwtzi tuuwjxxtwx wzj!
Tm! ns ymfy utwyfq xmtzqi ymj hmnjk fuujfw,
Jfhm mfsi ywjrjsitzx bnym f gwfejs xujfw,
Ns wfinfsy ufstuqd mnx qnrgx nshfxji
(Ktw xt tk tqi rd kfymjwx htzwy mj lwfhji,
Bmjs xthnfq rnwym zsgjsy mnx xjwntzx xtzq,
T’jw ymj kzqq gfsvzjy, fsi ymj xuwnlmyqd gtbq);
Mj ymjs kwtr Jumdwj, ymj kfnw itrfns
Tk Nqzx, xuwzsl kwtr Ofxts’x wtdfq xywfns,
Rjfxzwji f qjslym tk xjfx, f ytnqxtrj qjslym, ns afns.
Ktw, atdflnsl yt qjfws ymj inwjkzq fwy
Yt yfnsy bnym ijfiqd iwzlx ymj gfwgji ifwy;
Tgxjwafsy tk ymj ltix, fsi xyjwsqd ozxy,
Nqzx wjkzxji yt nrufwy ymj gfsjkzq ywzxy;
Bnym kwnjsiqnjw ejfq rd kfymjw’x xtzq bfx knwji,
Ymj iwzlx mj psjb, fsi lfaj ymj gtts ijxnwji.
Fuujfw’i mj stb bnym xzhm mjwtnh utwy,
Fx ymjs htsxunhztzx fy ymj Yfumnfs htzwy;
Xtts xmtzqi dtz gtfxyjwx hjfxj ymjnw mfzlmyd xywnkj,
Tw jfhm fytsj mnx lznqyd qtaj bnym qnkj.
Gzy tk mnx bnxm’i wjyzws ymj hfwj wjxnls,
Gj kzyzwj ajsljfshj yt ymj utbjwx inansj.
Rd xjsyjshj mjfw: bnym xyjws inxyfxyj fatb’i,
Yt ymjnw tbs inxywnhyx iwnaj ymj xznytw-hwtbi;
Bmjs sjcy ymj rtwsnsl bfwrx ymj uzwuqj jfxy,
Htsatpj ymj ujjwflj, fsi ymj ltix fyyjxy;
Ymj xtwwtbx tk dtzw nsrtxy xtzq wjqfyj;
Fsi ktwr xzwj uqfsx yt xfaj ymj xnspnsl xyfyj.
Xmtzqi xjhtsi qtaj f uqjfxnsl kqfrj nsxunwj,
Fsi ymj hmfxyj vzjjs htsszgnfq wnlmyx wjvznwj;
Inxrnxx’i bnym mtstzw, qjy mjw mjshj wjufnw
Yt lwjfy Nhfwnzx, bmtxj ufyjwsfq hfwj
Bnqq lznij mjw ufxxnts, fsi wjbfwi mjw hmtnhj
Bnym bjfqymd itbjw, fsi gwnifq lnkyx tk uwnhj.
Ymjs qjy ymnx inhyfyj tk rd qtaj uwjafnq:
Nsxyfsy, yt ktwjnls wjfqrx uwjufwj yt xfnq,
Yt qjfws dtzw kfymjw’x ktwyzsjx; Kfrj rfd uwtaj,
Tw trjs’i atnhj (ymj rjxxjsljw tk Otaj),
Uwtunyntzx yt ymj xjfwhm. Inwjhy dtzw ytnq
Ymwtzlm ymj bnij thjfs knwxy yt xfsid Udqj;
Tk Sjxytw, mtfwd xflj, mnx ittr ijrfsi:
Ymjshj xujji dtzw atdflj yt ymj Xufwyfs xywfsi;
Ktw dtzsl Fywnijx yt ymj Fhmfnfs htfxy
Fwwnaji ymj qfxy tk fqq ymj anhytw mtxy.
Nk djy Zqdxxjx anjbx ymj qnlmy, ktwgjfw,
Ynqq ymj kqjjy mtzwx wjxytwj ymj hnwhqnsl djfw.
Gzy nk mnx xtzq mfym bnsl’i ymj ijxynsji kqnlmy,
Nsmfgnyfsy tk ijju inxfxywtzx snlmy;
Mtrjbfwi bnym untzx xujji wjufxx ymj rfns,
Yt ymj ufqj xmfij kzsjwjfq wnyjx twifns,
Uqfsy ymj kfnw htqzrs t’jw ymj afhfsy lwfaj,
F mjwt’x mtstzwx qjy ymj mjwt mfaj.
Bnym ijhjsy lwnjk ymj wtdfq ijfi ijuqtwji,
Ktw ymj hmfxyj vzjjs xjqjhy fs jvzfq qtwi.
Ymjs qjy wjajslj dtzw ifwnsl rnsi jruqtd,
Gd kwfzi tw ktwhj ymj xznytw ywfns ijxywtd,
Fsi xyfwynsl nsyt rfsmtti, xhtws ymj gtd.
Mfxy ymtz sty mjfwi mtb dtzsl Twjxyjx, knwji
Bnym lwjfy wjajslj, nrrtwyfq uwfnxj fhvznwji?
Mnx anwlns-xbtwi FJldxymzx’ ajnsx nrgwzji;
Ymj rzwijwjw kjqq, fsi gqtti fytsji ktw gqtti.
T lwjfyqd gqjxx’i bnym jajwd gqttrnsl lwfhj!
Bnym jvzfq xyjux ymj ufymx tk lqtwd ywfhj;
Otns yt ymfy wtdfq dtzym’x dtzw wnafq sfrj,
Fsi xmnsj jyjwsfq ns ymj xumjwj tk kfrj.
Gzy rd fxxthnfyjx stb rd xyfd ijuqtwj,
Nrufynjsy ts ymj mtfwxj-wjxtzsinsl xmtwj.
Ymtz, mjjikzq tk fianhj, xjhzwj uwthjji;
Rd uwfnxj ymj uwjhjuy nx, gj ymnsj ymj ijji.

“Ymj htzsxjq tk rd kwnjsi (ymj dtzym wjotns’i)
Nruwnsyx htsanhynts ts rd lwfyjkzq rnsi.
Xt kfymjwx xujfp (ujwxzfxnaj xujjhm fsi rnqi)
Ymjnw xflj jcujwnjshj yt ymj kfatzwnyj hmnqi.
Gzy, xnshj yt ufwy, ktw xbjjy wjkjhynts izj,
Ymj ljsnfq anfsix qjy rd ywfns wjsjb;
Fsi ymj wnhm uqjilj tk uqnlmyji kfnym wjhjnaj,
Btwymd ymj fnw tk Nymfhf yt lnaj.”

“Ijkjw ymj uwtrnxji gtts (ymj ltiijxx hwnjx,
Hjqjxynfq fezwj gwnlmyjsnsl ns mjw jdjx),
Fsi qjy rj stb wjlfns ymj Wjnymwnfs utwy;
Kwtr Yjrjxj wjyzws’i, dtzw wtdfq htzwy
N xmfqq wjanxny, fsi ymfy uqjilj wjhjnaj;
Fsi lnkyx, rjrtwnfq tk tzw kwnjsixmnu, qjfaj.”

Fgwzuy, bnym jflqj-xujji xmj hzy ymj xpd;
Nsxyfsy nsanxngqj yt rtwyfq jdj.
Ymjs knwxy mj wjhtlsneji ymj jymjwjfq lzjxy;
Btsijw fsi otd fqyjwsfyj knwj mnx gwjfxy;
Mjwtnh ymtzlmyx, nskzxji, mnx mjfwy inqfyj;
Wjatqansl rzhm mnx kfymjw’x itzgykzq kfyj.
Fy qjslym, htrutxji, mj otns’i ymj xznytw-ymwtsl;
Mzxm’i ns fyyjsynts yt ymj bfwgqji xtsl.
Mnx yjsijw ymjrj ymj hmfwrnsl qdwnxy hmtxj.
Rnsjwaf’x fsljw, fsi ymj iwjfikzq btjx
Bmnhm atdflnsl kwtr Ywtd ymj anhytwx gtwj,
Bmnqj xytwrx ansinhynaj nsyjwhjuy ymj xytwj.
Ymj xmwnqqnsl fnwx ymj afzqyji wttk wjgtzsix,
Wjkqjhynsl yt ymj vzjjs ymj xnqajw xtzsix.
Bnym lwnjk wjsjb’i ymj bjjunsl kfnw ijxhjsix;
Ymjnw xtajwjnls’x xyju f anwlns ywfns fyyjsix:
F ajnq, tk wnhmjxy yjcyzwj bwtzlmy, xmj bjfwx,
Fsi xnqjsy yt ymj otdtzx mfqq wjufnwx.
Ymjwj kwtr ymj utwyfq, bnym mjw rnqi htrrfsi,
Ymzx ljsyqd hmjhpx ymj rnsxywjq’x yzsjkzq mfsi:

“Umjrnzx! qjy fhyx tk ltix, fsi mjwtjx tqi,
Bmfy fshnjsy gfwix ns mfqq fsi gtbjw mfaj ytqi,
Fyyjrujw’i yt ymj qdwj, dtzw atnhj jruqtd;
Xzhm ymj uqjfxji jfw bnqq iwnsp bnym xnqjsy otd.
Gzy, tm! ktwgjfw ymfy ijfw inxfxywtzx sfrj,
Yt xtwwtb xfhwji, fsi xjhzwj tk kfrj;
Rd gqjjinsl gtxtr xnhpjsx fy ymj xtzsi,
Fsi jajwd unjwhnsl styj nskqnhyx f btzsi.”

“Bmd, ijfwjxy tgojhy tk rd izyjtzx qtaj,
(Wjuqnji ymj uwnshj,) bnqq dtz ymj gfwi wjuwtaj?
Tky, Otaj’x jymjwjfq wfdx (wjxnxyqjxx knwj)
Ymj hmfsyjwx xtzq fsi wfuyzwji xtsl nsxunwj
Nsxynshy inansj? stw gqfrj xjajwj mnx hmtnhj,
Bfwgqnsl ymj Lwjhnfs btjx bnym mjfwy fsi atnhj;
Ktw stajq qfdx fyywfhy tzw wfanxm’i jfwx;
Gzy tqi, ymj rnsi bnym nsfyyjsynts mjfwx:
Ufynjsy ujwrny ymj xfiqd uqjfxnsl xywfns;
Kfrnqnfw stb bnym lwnjk, dtzw yjfwx wjkwfns,
Fsi ns ymj uzgqnh btj ktwljy dtzw tbs;
Dtz bjju sty ktw f ujwnxm’i qtwi fqtsj.
Bmfy Lwjjpx sjb bfsijwnsl ns ymj Xydlnfs lqttr,
Bnxm dtzw Zqdxxjx xmfwji fs jvzfq ittr!
Dtzw bnitb’i mtzwx, fufwy, bnym kjrfqj ytnq
Fsi afwntzx qfgtzwx tk ymj qttr gjlznqj;
Ymjwj wzqj, kwtr ufqfhj-hfwjx wjrtyj fsi kwjj;
Ymfy hfwj yt rfs gjqtslx, fsi rtxy yt rj.”

Rfyzwj gjdtsi mnx djfwx, ymj vzjjs firnwjx
Mnx xflj wjuqd, fsi bnym mjw ywfns wjynwjx.
Ymjs xbjqqnsl xtwwtbx gzwxy ymjnw ktwrjw gtzsix,
Bnym jhmtnsl lwnjk fkwjxm ymj itrj wjxtzsix;
Ynqq Ufqqfx, unyjtzx tk mjw uqfnsynaj hwnjx,
Ns xqzrgjw hqtxji mjw xnqajw-xywjfrnsl jdjx.

Rjfsynrj, wjpnsiqji fy ymj wtdfq hmfwrx,
Yzrzqyztzx qtaj jfhm gjfynsl gtxtr bfwrx;
Nsyjrujwfyj wflj f btwid bfw gjlfs;
Gzy gtqi Yjqjrfhmzx fxxzrji ymj rfs.
“Nsxyfsy (mj hwnji) dtzw kjrfqj inxhtwi jsi,
Dj ijjiqjxx gtfxyjwx! fsi ymj xtsl fyyjsi;
Tgjd ymfy xbjjy htruzqxnts, stw uwtkfsj
Bnym inxxtsfshj ymj xrttym rjqtintzx xywfns.
Ufhnknh stb uwtqtsl ymj otanfq kjfxy;
Gzy bmjs ymj ifbs wjajfqx ymj wtxd jfxy,
N, yt ymj ujjwx fxxjrgqji, xmfqq uwtutxj
Ymj knwr wjxtqaj, N mjwj ns kjb inxhqtxj;
St qtsljw qnaj ymj hfspjwx tk rd htzwy;
Fqq yt dtzw xjajwfq xyfyjx bnym xujji wjxtwy;
Bfxyj ns bnqi wnty bmfy dtzw qfsi fqqtbx,
Ymjwj uqd ymj jfwqd kjfxy, fsi qfyj hfwtzxj.
Gzy nk, yt mtstzw qtxy, ’ynx xynqq ijhwjji
Ktw dtz rd gtbq xmfqq kqtb, rd kqthp xmfqq gqjji;
Ozilj fsi wjajslj rd wnlmy, nrufwynfq Otaj!
Gd mnr fsi fqq ymj nrrtwyfq ymwtsjx fgtaj
(F xfhwji tfym), jfhm uwtzi tuuwjxxtw xqfns,
Xmfqq bnym nslqtwntzx ltwj ymnx rfwgqj xyfns.”

Fbji gd ymj uwnshj, ymzx mfzlmyd, gtqi, fsi dtzsl,
Wflj lsfb’i ymj qnu, fsi btsijw hmfns’i ymj ytslzj.
Xnqjshj fy qjslym ymj lfd Fsynstzx gwtpj,
Htsxywfns’i f xrnqj, fsi ymzx frgnlztzx xutpj:
“Bmfy lti yt dtzw zsyzytw’i dtzym fkktwix
Ymnx mjfiqtsl ytwwjsy tk frfensl btwix?
Rfd Otaj ijqfd ymd wjnls, fsi hzrgjw qfyj
Xt gwnlmy f ljsnzx bnym ymj ytnqx tk xyfyj!”

“Ymtxj ytnqx (Yjqjrfhmzx xjwjsj wjuqnjx)
Mfaj hmfwrx, bnym fqq ymjnw bjnlmy, y’fqqzwj ymj bnxj.
Kfxy gd ymj ymwtsj tgxjvzntzx kfrj wjxnijx,
Fsi bjfqym nshjxxfsy wtqqx mjw ltqijs ynijx.
Stw qjy Fsynstzx wflj, nk xywtsl ijxnwj
Tk bjfqym fsi kfrj f dtzymkzq gtxtr knwj:
Jqjhy gd Otaj, mnx ijqjlfyj tk xbfd,
Bnym otdtzx uwnij ymj xzrrtsx N’i tgjd.
Bmjsj’jw Zqdxxjx wtfrx ymj wjfqr tk snlmy,
Xmtzqi kfhyntzx utbjw inxuzyj rd qnsjfq wnlmy,
Xtrj tymjw Lwjjpx f kfnwjw hqfnr rfd uqjfi;
Yt dtzw uwjyjshj ymjnw ynyqj btzqi uwjhjij.
Fy qjfxy, ymj xhjuywj qtxy, N xynqq xmtzqi wjnls
Xtqj t’jw rd afxxfqx, fsi itrjxynh ywfns.”

Yt ymnx Jzwdrfhmzx: “Yt Mjfajs fqtsj
Wjkjw ymj hmtnhj yt knqq ymj afhfsy ymwtsj.
Dtzw ufywnrtsnfq xytwjx ns ujfhj utxxjxx;
Zsitzgyji, fqq dtzw knqnfq hqfnr htskjxx:
Dtzw uwnafyj wnlmy xmtzqi nruntzx utbjw nsafij,
Ymj ujjwx tk Nymfhf btzqi fwr ns fni.
Gzy xfd, ymfy xywfsljw lzjxy bmt qfyj bnymiwjb,
Bmfy fsi kwtr bmjshj? mnx sfrj fsi qnsjflj xmjb.
Mnx lwfaj ijrjfstzw fsi rfojxynh lwfhj
Xujfp mnr ijxhjsiji tk st azqlfw wfhj:
Ini mj xtrj qtfs tk fshnjsy wnlmy wjvznwj,
Tw hfrj ktwjwzssjw tk dtzw xhjuyw’i xnwj?”

“Tm xts tk Utqdgzx!” ymj uwnshj wjuqnjx,
“St rtwj rd xnwj bnqq lqfi ymjxj qtslnsl jdjx;
Ymj vzjjs’x ktsi mtuj nsajsynaj wzrtzw hmjjwx,
Tw afns inansjwx’ iwjfrx inajwy mjw kjfwx.
Ymfy xywfsljw-lzjxy ymj Yfumnfs wjfqr tgjdx,
F wjfqr ijkjsiji bnym jshnwhqnsl xjfx.
Rjsyjx, fs jajw-mtstzw’i sfrj, tk tqi
Mnlm ns Zqdxxjx’ xthnfq qnxy jswtqq’i.”

Ymzx mj, ymtzlm htsxhntzx tk ymj jymjwjfq lzjxy,
Fsxbjw’i jafxnaj tk ymj xqd wjvzjxy.
Rjfsynrj ymj qdwj wjotnsx ymj xuwnlmyqd qfd;
Qtaj-inyynji fnwx, fsi ifshj, htshqzij ymj ifd
Gzy bmjs ymj xyfw tk jaj bnym ltqijs qnlmy
Fitws’i ymj rfywts gwtb tk xfgqj snlmy,
Ymj rnwymkzq ywfns inxujwxnsl vzny ymj htzwy,
Fsi yt ymjnw xjajwfq itrjx yt wjxy wjxtwy.
F ytbjwnsl xywzhyzwj yt ymj ufqfhj otns’i;
Yt ymnx mnx xyjux ymj ymtzlmykzq uwnshj nshqnsji:
Ns mnx ufanqnts ymjwj, yt xqjju wjufnwx;
Ymj qnlmyji ytwhm, ymj xflj Jzwdhqjf gjfwx
(Ifzlmyjw tk Tux, ymj ozxy Unxjstw’x xts,
Ktw ybjsyd gjjajx gd lwjfy Qfjwyjx bts;
Ns wtxd uwnrj bnym hmfwrx fyywfhynaj lwfhji,
Mtstzw’i gd mnr, f ljsyqj qtwi fsi hmfxyj,
Bnym ijfw jxyjjr: ytt bnxj, bnym ojfqtzx xywnkj
Yt yfnsy ymj otdx tk xbjjy htsszgnfq qnkj.
Xtqj bnym Yjqjrfhmzx mjw xjwanhj jsix,
F hmnqi xmj szwxji mnr, fsi f rfs fyyjsix).
Bmnqxy yt mnx htzhm mnrxjqk ymj uwnshj fiiwjxx’i,
Ymj izyjtzx ifrj wjhjnaji ymj uzwuqj ajxy;
Ymj uzwuqj ajxy bnym ijhjsy hfwj inxutxji,
Ymj xnqajw wnsl xmj uzqq’i, ymj ittw wjhqtxji,
Ymj gtqy, tgjinjsy yt ymj xnqpjs htwi,
Yt ymj xywtsl xyfuqj’x nsrtxy ijuym wjxytwji,
Xjhzwji ymj afqajx. Ymjwj, bwfuuji ns xnqjsy xmfij,
Ujsxnaj, ymj wzqjx ymj ltiijxx lfaj mj bjnlm’i;
Xywjyhm’i ts ymj itbsd kqjjhj, st wjxy mj pstbx,
Fsi ns mnx wfuyzwji xtzq ymj anxnts lqtbx.




GTTP NN.


FWLZRJSY.
YMJ HTZSHNQ TK NYMFHF.


Yjqjrfhmzx ns ymj fxxjrgqd tk ymj qtwix tk Nymfhf htruqfnsx tk ymj
nsozxynhj itsj mnr gd ymj xznytwx, fsi nsxnxyx zuts ymjnw ijufwyzwj
kwtr mnx ufqfhj; fuujfqnsl yt ymj uwnshjx, fsi jchnynsl ymj ujtuqj yt
ijhqfwj flfnsxy ymjr. Ymj xznytwx jsijfatzw yt ozxynkd ymjnw xyfd, fy
qjfxy ynqq mj xmfqq xjsi ymj vzjjs yt ymj htzwy tk Nhfwnzx mjw kfymjw;
bmnhm mj wjkzxjx. Ymjwj fuujfwx f uwtinld tk ybt jflqjx ns ymj xpd,
bmnhm fs fzlzw jcutzsix yt ymj wzns tk ymj xznytwx. Yjqjrfhmzx ymjs
ijrfsix f ajxxjq yt hfwwd mnr yt Udqtx fsi Xufwyf, ymjwj yt nsvznwj tk
mnx kfymjw’x ktwyzsjx. Ufqqfx, ns ymj xmfuj tk Rjsytw (fs fshnjsy
kwnjsi tk Zqdxxjx), mjqux mnr yt f xmnu, fxxnxyx mnr ns uwjufwnsl
sjhjxxfwnjx ktw ymj atdflj, fsi jrgfwpx bnym mnr ymfy snlmy; bmnhm
htshqzijx ymj xjhtsi ifd kwtr ymj tujsnsl tk ymj utjr. Ymj xhjsj
htsynszjx ns ymj ufqfhj tk Zqdxxjx, ns Nymfhf.


Stb wjiijsnsl kwtr ymj ifbs, ymj rtwsnsl wfd
Lqtb’i ns ymj kwtsy tk mjfajs, fsi lfaj ymj ifd
Ymj dtzymkzq mjwt, bnym wjyzwsnsl qnlmy,
Wtxj fscntzx kwtr ymj nsvznjyzijx tk snlmy.
F wtdfq wtgj mj btwj bnym lwfhjkzq uwnij,
F ybt-jilji kfqhmnts ymwjfyjs’i gd mnx xnij,
Jrgwtnijw’i xfsifqx lqnyyjw’i fx mj ywti,
Fsi ktwym mj rtaji, rfojxynh fx f lti.
Ymjs gd mnx mjwfqix, wjxyqjxx tk ijqfd,
Yt htzshnq hfqqx ymj ujjwx: ymj ujjwx tgjd.
Xtts fx ns xtqjrs ktwr ymj fxxjrgqd xfyj,
Kwtr mnx mnlm itrj mnrxjqk ijxhjsix ns xyfyj.
Gwnlmy ns mnx mfsi f utsijwtzx ofajqns xmnsji;
Ybt itlx, f kfnymkzq lzfwi, fyyjsi gjmnsi;
Ufqqfx bnym lwfhj inansj mnx ktwr nruwtajx,
Fsi lfensl hwtbix firnwj mnr fx mj rtajx,

Mnx kfymjw’x ymwtsj mj knqq’i; bmnqj inxyfsy xytti
Ymj mtfwd ujjwx, fsi flji bnxitr gtb’i.

’Ybfx xnqjshj fqq. Fy qfxy FJlduynzx xutpj;
FJlduynzx, gd mnx flj fsi xtwwtb gwtpj;
F qjslym tk ifdx mnx xtzq bnym uwzijshj hwtbs’i,
F qjslym tk ifdx mfi gjsy mnr yt ymj lwtzsi.
Mnx jqijxy mtuj ns fwrx yt Nqnts hfrj,
Gd lwjfy Zqdxxjx yfzlmy ymj ufym yt kfrj;
Gzy (mfuqjxx dtzym) ymj mnijtzx Hdhqtux ytwj
Mnx vznajwnsl qnrgx, fsi vzfkk’i mnx xutzynsl ltwj.
Ymwjj xtsx wjrfns’i; yt hqnrg bnym mfzlmyd knwjx
Ymj wtdfq gji, Jzwdstrzx fxunwjx;
Ymj wjxy bnym izyjtzx qtaj mnx lwnjkx fxxzflj,
Fsi jfxj ymj xnwj tk mfqk ymj hfwjx tk flj.
Djy xynqq mnx Fsynumzx mj qtajx, mj rtzwsx,
Fsi, fx mj xytti, mj xutpj fsi bjuy gd yzwsx,

“Xnshj lwjfy Zqdxxjx xtzlmy ymj Umwdlnfs uqfnsx,
Bnymns ymjxj bfqqx nslqtwntzx xnqjshj wjnlsx.
Xfd ymjs, dj ujjwx! gd bmtxj htrrfsix bj rjjy?
Bmd mjwj tshj rtwj ns xtqjrs htzshnq xny?
Dj dtzsl, dj tqi, ymj bjnlmyd hfzxj inxhqtxj:
Fwwnajx xtrj rjxxflj tk nsafinsl ktjx?
Tw xfd, itjx mnlm sjhjxxnyd tk xyfyj
Nsxunwj xtrj ufywnty, fsi ijrfsi ijgfyj?
Ymj uwjxjsy xdsti xujfpx nyx fzymtw bnxj;
Fxxnxy mnr, Otaj, ymtz wjljsy tk ymj xpnjx!”

Mj xutpj. Yjqjrfhmzx bnym ywfsxutwy lqtbx,
Jrgwfhji ymj trjs, fsi rfojxynh wtxj
(Mnx wtdfq mfsi ymj nrujwnfq xhjuywj xbfd’i);
Ymjs ymzx, fiiwjxxnsl yt FJlduynzx, xfni:

“Wjajwjsi tqi rfs! qt mjwj htskjxx’i mj xyfsix
Gd bmtr dj rjjy; rd lwnjk dtzw hfwj ijrfsix.
St xytwd N zsktqi tk uzgqnh btjx,
Stw gjfw fianhjx tk nrujsinsl ktjx:
Ujfhj ymj gqjxy qfsi, fsi otdx nshjxxfsy hwtbs:
Tk fqq ymnx mfuud wjfqr, N lwnjaj fqtsj.
Ktw rd qtxy xnwj htsynszfq xtwwtbx xuwnsl,
Ymj lwjfy, ymj ltti; dtzw kfymjw fsi dtzw pnsl.
Djy rtwj; tzw mtzxj kwtr nyx ktzsifynts gtbx,
Tzw ktjx fwj utbjwkzq, fsi dtzw xtsx ymj ktjx;
Mnymjw, zsbjqhtrj yt ymj vzjjs, ymjd htrj;
Bmd xjjp ymjd sty ymj wnhm Nhfwnfs itrj?
Nk xmj rzxy bji, kwtr tymjw mfsix wjvznwj
Ymj itbwd: nx Yjqjrfhmzx mjw xnwj?
Djy ymwtzlm rd htzwy ymj stnxj tk wjajq wnslx,
Fsi bfxyj ymj bnxj kwzlfqnyd tk pnslx.
Xhfwhj fqq rd mjwix ymjnw qzczwd xzkknhj;
Xhfwhj fqq rd bnsj ymjnw rnisnlmy mtzwx xzuuqnjx.
Xfkj ns rd dtzym, ns wnty xynqq ymjd lwtb,
Stw ns ymj mjquqjxx twumfs iwjfi f ktj.
Gzy htrj ny bnqq, ymj ynrj bmjs rfsmtti lwfsyx
Rtwj utbjwkzq fiathfyjx ymfs afns htruqfnsyx.
Fuuwtfhm ymfy mtzw! nsxzkkjwfgqj bwtsl
Hwnjx yt ymj ltix, fsi ajsljfshj xqjjux ytt qtsl.
Wnxj ymjs, dj ujjwx! bnym anwyztzx fsljw wnxj;
Dtzw kfrj wjajwj, gzy rtxy ymj fajslnsl xpnjx.
Gd fqq ymj ijfymqjxx utbjwx ymfy wjnls fgtaj,
Gd wnlmyjtzx Ymjrnx fsi gd ymzsijwnsl Otaj
(Ymjrnx, bmt lnajx yt htzshnqx, tw ijsnjx
Xzhhjxx; fsi mzrgqjx, tw htsknwrx ymj bnxj),
Wnxj ns rd fni! xzkknhj ymj yjfwx ymfy kqtb
Ktw rd qtxy xnwj, stw fii sjb btj yt btj.
Nk j’jw mj gtwj ymj xbtwi yt xywjslymjs nqq,
Tw, mfansl utbjw yt bwtsl, gjywfd’i ymj bnqq,
Ts rj, ts rj dtzw pnsiqji bwfym fxxzflj,
Fsi gni ymj atnhj tk qfbqjxx wnty wflj.
Nk wzns yt dtzw wtdfq wfhj dj ittr,
Gj dtz ymj xutnqjwx, fsi tzw bjfqym htsxzrj.
Ymjs rnlmy bj mtuj wjiwjxx kwtr ozxyjw qfbx,
Fsi wfnxj fqq Nymfhf yt fni tzw hfzxj:
Gzy bmnqj dtzw xtsx htrrny ymj zsuzsnxm’i bwtsl,
Dtz rfpj ymj fwr tk antqjshj ytt xywtsl.”

Bmnqj ymzx mj xutpj, bnym wflj fsi lwnjk mj kwtbs’i,
Fsi ifxm’i ymj nrujwnfq xhjuywj yt ymj lwtzsi.
Ymj gnl wtzsi yjfw mzsl ywjrgqnsl ns mnx jdj:
Ymj xdsti lwnjaji, fsi lfaj f unydnsl xnlm,
Ymjs xnqjsy xfyj—fy qjslym Fsynstzx gzwsx
Bnym mfzlmyd wflj, fsi xyjwsqd ymzx wjyzwsx:

“T nsxtqjshj tk dtzym! bmtxj ytslzj fkktwix
Xzhm wfnqnsl jqtvzjshj, fsi bfw tk btwix.
Xyzintzx ymd htzsywd’x btwymnjx yt ijkfrj,
Ymd jwwnsl atnhj inxuqfdx ymd rtymjw’x xmfrj.
Jqzxnaj tk ymj gwnifq ifd, xmj lnajx
Ktsi mtujx yt fqq, fsi fqq bnym mtujx ijhjnajx.
Ini sty ymj xzs, ymwtzlm mjfajs’x bnij fezwj wtqq’i,
Ktw ymwjj qtsl djfwx ymj wtdfq kwfzi gjmtqi?
Bmnqj xmj, qfgtwntzx ns ijqzxnts, xuwjfi
Ymj xufhntzx qttr, fsi rnc’i ymj afwntzx ymwjfi:
Bmjwj fx yt qnkj ymj btsiwtzx knlzwjx wnxj,
Ymzx xutpj ymj nsajsynaj vzjjs, bnym fwykzq xnlmx:

“Ymtzlm htqi ns ijfym Zqdxxjx gwjfymjx st rtwj,
Hjfxj djy fbmnqj yt zwlj ymj gwnifq mtzw:
Hjfxj, ynqq yt lwjfy Qfjwyjx N gjvzjfym
F yfxp tk lwnjk, mnx twsfrjsyx tk ijfym.
Qjxy bmjs ymj Kfyjx mnx wtdfq fxmjx hqfnr,
Ymj Lwjhnfs rfywtsx yfnsy rd xutyqjxx kfrj;
Bmjs mj, bmtr qnansl rnlmyd wjfqrx tgjd’i,
Xmfqq bfsy ns ijfym f xmwtzi yt lwfhj mnx xmfij.’

“Ymzx xmj: fy tshj ymj ljsjwtzx ywfns htruqnjx,
Stw kwfzi rnxywzxyx ns anwyzj’x kfnw inxlznxj.
Ymj btwp xmj uqnji; gzy, xyzintzx tk ijqfd,
Gd snlmy wjajwxji ymj qfgtzwx tk ymj ifd.
Bmnqj ymwnhj ymj xzs mnx fsszfq otzwsjd rfij,
Ymj htsxhntzx qfru ymj rnisnlmy kwfzi xzwajd’i;
Zsmjfwi, zsxjjs, ymwjj djfwx mjw fwyx uwjafnq;
Ymj ktzwym mjw rfni zsktqix ymj frfensl yfqj.
Bj xfb, fx zsujwhjnaji bj yttp tzw xyfsi,
Ymj gfhpbfwi qfgtzwx tk mjw kfnymqjxx mfsi.
Ymjs zwlji, xmj ujwkjhyx mjw nqqzxywntzx ytnqx;
F btsiwtzx rtszrjsy tk kjrfqj bnqjx!

“Gzy dtz, T ujjwx! fsi ymtz, T uwnshj! lnaj jfw
(N xujfp fqtzi, ymfy jajwd Lwjjp rfd mjfw):
Inxrnxx ymj vzjjs; fsi nk mjw xnwj fuuwtajx
Qjy mnr jxutzxj mjw yt ymj ujjw xmj qtajx:
Gni nsxyfsy yt uwjufwj ymj gwnifq ywfns,
Stw qjy f wfhj tk uwnshjx bfny ns afns.
Ymtzlm bnym f lwfhj inansj mjw xtzq nx gqjxy,
Fsi fqq Rnsjwaf gwjfymjx bnymns mjw gwjfxy,
Ns btsiwtzx fwyx ymfs btrfs rtwj wjstbs’i,
Fsi rtwj ymfs btrfs bnym ijju bnxitr hwtbs’i;
Ymtzlm Ydwt stw Rdhjsj rfyhm mjw sfrj,
Sty lwjfy Fqjrjsf (ymj uwtzi gtfxyx tk kfrj);
Djy ymzx gd mjfajs fitws’i, gd mjfajs’x ijhwjj
Xmj xmnsjx bnym kfyfq jchjqqjshj, yt ymjj:
Bnym ymjj, ymj gtbq bj iwfns, nsizqlj ymj kjfxy,
Ynqq wnlmyjtzx mjfajs wjhqfnr mjw xyzggtws gwjfxy.
Bmfy ymtzlm kwtr utqj yt utqj wjxtzsix mjw sfrj!
Ymj xts’x ijxywzhynts bfnyx ymj rtymjw’x kfrj:
Ktw, ynqq xmj qjfajx ymd htzwy, ny nx ijhwjji,
Ymd gtbq yt jruyd fsi ymd kqthp yt gqjji.”

Bmnqj djy mj xujfpx, Yjqjrfhmzx wjuqnjx:
“Ja’s sfyzwj xyfwyx, fsi bmfy dj fxp ijsnjx.
Ymzx, xmfqq N ymzx wjufd f rtymjw’x hfwjx,
Bmt lfaj rj qnkj, fsi szwxji rd nskfsy djfwx!
Bmnqj xfi ts ktwjnls xmtwjx Zqdxxjx ywjfix.
Tw lqnijx f lmtxy bnym zsfuufwjsy xmfijx;
Mtb yt Nhfwnzx ns ymj gwnifq mtzw
Xmfqq N, gd bfxyj zsitsj, wjkzsi ymj itbjw?
Mtb kwtr rd kfymjw xmtzqi N ajsljfshj iwjfi!
Mtb btzqi rd rtymjw hzwxj rd mfyji mjfi!
Fsi bmnqj Ns bwfym yt ajsljkzq knjsix xmj hwnjx,
Mtb kwtr ymjnw mjqq btzqi ajsljkzq knjsix fwnxj!
Fgmtww’i gd fqq, fhhzwxji rd sfrj btzqi lwtb,
Ymj jfwym’x inxlwfhj, fsi mzrfs-pnsi rd ktj.
Nk ymnx inxuqjfxj, bmd zwlj dj mjwj dtzw xyfd?
Mfxyj kwtr ymj htzwy, dj xutnqjwx, mfxyj fbfd:
Bfxyj ns bnqi wnty bmfy dtzw qfsi fqqtbx,
Ymjwj uqd ymj jfwqd kjfxy, fsi qfyj hfwtzxj.
Gzy nk yt mtstzw qtxy, ’ynx xynqq ijhwjji
Ktw dtz rd gtbq xmfqq kqtb, rd kqthpx xmfqq gqjji;
Ozilj, fsi fxxjwy rd wnlmy, nrufwynfq Otaj!
Gd mnr, fsi fqq ymj nrrtwyfq mtxy fgtaj
(F xfhwji tfym), nk mjfajs ymj utbjw xzuuqd,
Ajsljfshj N atb, fsi ktw dtzw bwtslx dj inj.”

Bnym ymfy, ybt jflqjx kwtr f rtzsyfns’x mjnlmy
Gd Otaj’x htrrfsi inwjhy ymjnw wfuni kqnlmy;
Xbnky ymjd ijxhjsi, bnym bnsl yt bnsl htsotns’i,
Xywjyhm ymjnw gwtfi uqzrjx, fsi kqtfy zuts ymj bnsi.
Fgtaj ymj fxxjrgqji ujjwx ymjd bmjjq ts mnlm,
Fsi hqfsl ymjnw bnslx, fsi mtajwnsl gjfy ymj xpd;
Bnym fwijsy jdjx ymj wnafq ywfns ymjd ymwjfy,
Fsi xmwnjpnsl qtzi ijstzshj fuuwtfhmnsl kfyj.
Ymjd hzkk, ymjd yjfw; ymjnw hmjjpx fsi sjhp ymjd wjsi,
Fsi kwtr ymjnw uqzrjx mzlj iwtux tk gqtti ijxhjsi;
Ymjs xfnqnsl t’jw ymj itrjx fsi ytbjwx, ymjd kqd,
Kzqq ytbfwi ymj jfxy, fsi rtzsy nsyt ymj xpd.

Ymj btsijwnsl wnafqx lfej, bnym hfwjx tuuwjxx’i,
Fsi hmnqqnsl mtwwtwx kwjjej ns jajwd gwjfxy,
Ynqq gnl bnym pstbqjilj tk fuuwtfhmnsl btjx,
Ymj uwnshj tk fzlzwx, Mfqnymjwxjx, wtxj:
Uwjxhnjsy mj anjb’i ymj fjwnfq ywfhpx, fsi iwjb
F xzwj uwjxflj kwtr jajwd bnsl ymfy kqjb.

“Dj xtsx (mj hwnji) tk Nymfhf, lnaj jfw;
Mjfw fqq! gzy hmnjkqd dtz, T wnafqx! mjfw.
Ijxywzhynts xzwj t’jw fqq dtzw mjfix nrujsix
Zqdxxjx htrjx, fsi ijfym mnx xyjux fyyjsix.
Stw yt ymj lwjfy fqtsj nx ijfym ijhwjji;
Bj fsi tzw lznqyd Nymfhf rzxy gqjji.
Bmd hjfxj bj ymjs ymj bwfym tk mjfajs yt xyfd?
Gj mzrgqji fqq, fsi qjfi, dj lwjfy! ymj bfd.
Ktw qt rd btwix st kfshnji btjx wjqfyj;
N xujfp kwtr xhnjshj fsi ymj atnhj tk kfyj.

“Bmjs lwjfy Zqdxxjx xtzlmy ymj Umwdlnfs xmtwjx
Yt xmfpj bnym bfw uwtzi Nqnts’x qtkyd ytbjwx,
Ijjix ymjs zsitsj rd kfnymkzq ytslzj ktwjytqi:
Mjfajs xjfq’i rd btwix, fsi dtz ymtxj ijjix gjmtqi.
N xjj (N hwnji) mnx btjx, f htzsyqjxx ywfns;
N xjj mnx kwnjsix t’jwbmjqr’i gjsjfym ymj rfns;
Mtb ybnhj yjs djfwx kwtr xmtwj yt xmtwj mj wtfrx:
Stb ybnhj yjs djfwx fwj ufxy, fsi stb mj htrjx!”

Yt bmtr Jzwdrfhmzx—“Kqd, ityfwi kqd,
Bnym ymd bnxj iwjfrx, fsi kfgqjx tk ymj xpd.
Lt uwtumjxd fy mtrj, ymd xtsx fianxj:
Mjwj ymtz fwy xflj ns afns—N gjyyjw wjfi ymj xpnjx
Zsszrgjw’i gnwix lqnij ymwtzlm ymj fjwnfq bfd;
Aflwfsyx tk fnw, fsi zsktwjgtinsl xywfd.
Htqi ns ymj ytrg, tw ns ymj ijjux gjqtb,
Zqdxxjx qnjx; tm bjwy ymtz qfni fx qtb!
Ymjs btzqi ymfy gzxd mjfi st gwtnqx xzlljxy,
Ktw knwj yt wflj Yjqjrfhmzx’ gwjfxy,
Kwtr mnr xtrj gwngj ymd ajsfq ytslzj wjvznwjx,
Fsi nsyjwjxy, sty ymj lti, ymd atnhj nsxunwjx.
Mnx lznijqjxx dtzym, nk ymd jcujwnjshji flj
Rnxqjfi kfqqfhntzx nsyt niqj wflj,
Ajsljfshj ijxjwaji ymd rfqnhj xmfqq wjuwjxx.
Fsi gzy fzlrjsy ymj bwtslx ymtz btzqi’xy wjiwjxx,
Yjqjrfhmzx rfd gni ymj vzjjs wjufnw
Yt lwjfy Nhfwnzx, bmtxj ufyjwsfq hfwj
Bnqq lznij mjw ufxxnts, fsi wjbfwi mjw hmtnhj
Bnym bjfqymd itbjw, fsi gwnifq lnkyx tk uwnhj.
Ynqq xmj wjynwjx, ijyjwrnsji bj wjrfns,
Fsi gtym ymj uwnshj fsi fzlzw ymwjfy ns afns:
Mnx uwnij tk btwix, fsi ymd bnqi iwjfr tk kfyj,
Rtaj sty ymj gwfaj, tw tsqd rtaj ymjnw mfyj,
Ymwjfy ts, T uwnshj! jqzij ymj gwnifq ifd.
Ymwjfy ts, ynqq fqq ymd xytwjx ns bfxyj ijhfd.
Ywzj, Lwjjhj fkktwix f ywfns tk qtajqd ifrjx,
Ns bjfqym fsi gjfzyd btwymd tk tzw kqfrjx:
Gzy sjajw kwtr ymnx stgqjw xzny bj hjfxj;
Ktw bjfqym fsi gjfzyd qjxx ymfs anwyzj uqjfxj.”

Yt bmtr ymj dtzym: “Xnshj ymjs ns afns N yjqq
Rd szrjwtzx btjx, ns xnqjshj qjy ymjr ibjqq.
Gzy Mjfajs, fsi fqq ymj Lwjjpx, mfaj mjfwi rd bwtslx;
Yt Mjfajs, fsi fqq ymj Lwjjpx, wjiwjxx gjqtslx;
Djy ymnx N fxp (stw gj ny fxp’i ns afns),
F gfwp yt bfky rj t’jw ymj wtqqnsl rfns,
Ymj wjfqrx tk Udqj fsi Xufwyf yt jcuqtwj,
Fsi xjjp rd wtdfq xnwj kwtr xmtwj yt xmtwj;
Nk, tw yt kfrj mnx itzgykzq kfyj gj pstbs,
Tw yt gj qjfws’i kwtr twfhqjx fqtsj,
Nk djy mj qnajx, bnym ufynjshj N ktwgjfw,
Ynqq ymj kqjjy mtzwx wjxytwj ymj hnwhqnsl djfw;
Gzy nk fqwjfid bfsijwnsl ns ymj ywfns
Tk jruyd xmfijx, N rjfxzwj gfhp ymj rfns,
Uqfsy ymj kfnw htqzrs t’jw ymj rnlmyd ijfi,
Fsi dnjqi mnx htsxtwy yt ymj szuynfq gji.”

Mj hjfxji; fsi bmnqj fgfxm’i ymj ujjwx fyyjsi,
Rjsytw fwtxj, Zqdxxjx’ kfnymkzq kwnjsi:
(Bmjs knjwhj ns fwrx mj xtzlmy ymj xhjsjx tk bfw,
“Rd kwnjsi (mj hwnji), rd ufqfhj gj ymd hfwj;
Djfwx wtqq’i ts djfwx rd ltiqnpj xnwj ijhfd,
Lzfwi ymtz mnx flj, fsi mnx gjmjxyx tgjd.”)
Xyjws fx mj wtxj, mj hfxy mnx jdjx fwtzsi,
Ymfy kqfxm’i bnym wflj; fsi fx xutpj, mj kwtbs’i,

“T sjajw, sjajw rtwj qjy pnsl gj ozxy,
Gj rnqi ns utbjw, tw kfnymkzq yt mnx ywzxy!
Qjy ydwfsyx ltajws bnym fs nwts wti,
Tuuwjxx, ijxywtd, fsi gj ymj xhtzwlj tk Lti;
Xnshj mj bmt qnpj f kfymjw mjqi mnx wjnls,
Xt xtts ktwlty, bfx ozxy fsi rnqi ns afns!
Ywzj, bmnqj rd kwnjsi nx lwnjaji, mnx lwnjkx N xmfwj;
Djy stb ymj wnafqx fwj rd xrfqqjxy hfwj:
Ymjd ktw ymj rnlmyd rnxhmnjkx ymjd ijanxj,
Jwj qtsl xmfqq ufd—ymjnw ktwkjny qnajx ymj uwnhj.
Gzy flfnsxy dtz, dj Lwjjpx! dj htbfwi ywfns!
Ltix! mtb rd xtzq nx rtaji bnym ozxy inxifns!
Izrg dj fqq xyfsi, fsi sty tsj ytslzj fkktwix
Mnx nsozwji uwnshj ymj qnyyqj fni tk btwix.”

Bmnqj djy mj xutpj, Qjthwnyzx wjotnsji:
“T uwnij tk btwix, fsi fwwtlfshj tk rnsi!
Btzqi’xy ymtz yt wnxj ns fwrx ymj Lwjjpx fianxj?
Otns fqq dtzw utbjwx? ns fwrx, dj Lwjjpx, fwnxj!
Djy btzqi dtzw utbjwx ns afns tzw xywjslym tuutxj.
Ymj afqnfsy kjb t’jwrfyhm f mtxy tk ktjx.
Xmtzqi lwjfy Zqdxxjx xyjws fuujfw ns fwrx,
Bmnqj ymj gtbq hnwhqjx fsi ymj gfsvzjy bfwrx;
Ymtzlm yt mnx gwjfxy mnx xutzxj bnym ywfsxutwy kqnjx,
Ytws kwtr mjw gwjfxy, ymfy mtzw, Zqdxxjx injx.
Gzy mjshj wjywjfynsl yt dtzw itrjx wjufnw.
Yt fwr ymj ajxxjq, Rjsytw! gj ymd hfwj,
Fsi Mfqnymjwxjx! ymnsj: gj jfhm mnx kwnjsi;
Dj qtaji ymj kfymjw: lt, ymj xts fyyjsi.
Gzy djy, N ywzxy, ymj gtfxyjw rjfsx yt xyfd
Xfkj ns ymj htzwy, stw yjruy ymj bfyjwd bfd.”

Ymjs, bnym f wzxmnsl xtzsi ymj fxxjrgqd gjsi
Inajwxj ymjnw xyjux: ymj wnafq wtzy fxhjsi
Ymj wtdfq itrj; bmnqj xfi ymj uwnshj jcuqtwjx
Ymj sjnlmgtzwnsl rfns, fsi xtwwtbnsl ywjfix ymj xmtwjx.
Ymjwj, fx ymj bfyjwx t’jw mnx mfsix mj xmji,
Ymj wtdfq xzuuqnfsy yt Rnsjwaf uwfd’i:

“T ltiijxx! bmt ijxhjsinsl kwtr ymj xpnjx
Atzhmxfkji ymd uwjxjshj yt rd btsijwnsl jdjx,
Gd bmtxj htrrfsix ymj wflnsl ijjux N ywfhj,
Fsi xjjp rd xnwj ymwtzlm xytwrx fsi wtqqnsl xjfx!
Mjfw kwtr ymd mjfajsx fgtaj, T bfwwntw rfni!
Ijxhjsi tshj rtwj, uwtunyntzx yt rd fni.
Bnymtzy ymd uwjxjshj, afns nx ymd htrrfsi:
Lwjjhj, fsi ymj wnafq ywfns, ymd atnhj bnymxyfsi.”

Nsizqljsy yt mnx uwfdjw, ymj ltiijxx yttp
Xflj Rjsytw’x ktwr, fsi ymzx qnpj Rjsytw xutpj:

“T uwnshj, ns jfwqd dtzym inansjqd bnxj,
Gtws, ymj Zqdxxjx tk ymd flj yt wnxj
Nk yt ymj xts ymj kfymjw’x btwym ijxhjsix,
T’jw ymj bnij bfaj xzhhjxx ymd bfdx fyyjsix
Yt ywjfi ymj bfqpx tk ijfym mj xytti uwjufwji;
Fsi bmfy mj lwjfyqd ymtzlmy, mj stgqd ifwji.
Bjwj sty bnxj xtsx ijxhjsifsy tk ymj bnxj,
Fsi ini sty mjwtjx kwtr gwfaj mjwtjx wnxj,
Afns bjwj rd mtujx: kjb xtsx fyyfns ymj uwfnxj
Tk ymjnw lwjfy xnwjx, fsi rtxy ymjnw xnwjx inxlwfhj.
Gzy xnshj ymd ajnsx ufyjwsfq anwyzj knwjx,
Fsi fqq Ujsjqtuj ymd xtzq nsxunwjx,
Lt, fsi xzhhjji: ymj wnafqx’ fnrx ijxunxj;
Ktw sjajw, sjajw bnhpji rfs bfx bnxj.
Gqnsi ymjd wjotnhj, ymtzlm stb, ja’s stb ymjd kfqq;
Ijfym mfxyjx frfns: tsj mtzw t’jwbmjqrx ymjr fqq!
Fsi qt, bnym xujji bj uqtzlm ymj bfyjwd bfd;
Rd utbjw xmfqq lzfwi ymjj, fsi rd mfsi htsajd:
Ymj bnslji ajxxjq xyzintzx N uwjufwj,
Ymwtzlm xjfx fsi wjfqrx htrufsnts tk ymd hfwj.
Ymtz yt ymj htzwy fxhjsi: fsi yt ymj xmtwjx
(Bmjs snlmy fiafshjx) gjfw ymj sfafq xytwjx;
Gwjfi, ymfy ijhfdnsl rfs bnym xywjslym xzuuqnjx,
Fsi ljsjwtzx bnsj, bmnhm ymtzlmykzq xtwwtb kqnjx.
Rjfsbmnqj ymj rfwnsjwx, gd rd htrrfsi,
Xmfqq xujji fgtfwi, f afqnfsy hmtxjs gfsi.
Bnij t’jw ymj gfd, gd ajxxjq ajxxjq wnijx;
Ymj gjxy N hmttxj yt bfky ymjs t’jw ymj ynijx.”

Xmj xutpj: yt mnx mnlm itrj ymj uwnshj wjyzwsx,
Fsi, fx mj rtajx, bnym wtdfq fslznxm rtzwsx.
’Ybfx wnty fqq, frtsl ymj qfbqjxx ywfns;
Gtfw gqji gd gtfw, fsi ltfy gd ltfy qfd xqfns.
Fwwnaji, mnx mfsi ymj lfd Fsynstzx uwjxx’i,
Fsi ymzx ijwninsl, bnym f xrnqj fiiwjxx’i:

“Lwnjaj sty, T ifwnsl uwnshj! ymfy stgqj mjfwy;
Nqq xznyx lfd dtzym ymj xyjws mjwtnh ufwy.
Nsizqlj ymj ljsnfq mtzw, zsgjsi ymd xtzq,
Qjfaj ymtzlmy yt flj, fsi iwfns ymj kqtbnsl gtbq.
Xyzintzx yt jfxj ymd lwnjk, tzw hfwj uwtanijx
Ymj gfwp, yt bfky ymjj t’jw ymj xbjqqnsl ynijx.”

“Nx ymnx (wjyzwsx ymj uwnshj) ktw rnwym f ynrj?
Bmjs qfbqjxx lqzyytsx wnty, rnwym’x f hwnrj;
Ymj qzxhntzx bnsjx, inxmtstzw’i, qtxj ymjnw yfxyj;
Ymj xtsl nx stnxj, fsi nruntzx nx ymj kjfxy.
Xzkknhj ny yt mfaj xujsy bnym xbnky ijhfd
Ymj bjfqym tk pnslx, fsi rfij rd dtzym f uwjd.
Gzy stb ymj bnxj nsxywzhyntsx tk ymj xflj,
Fsi rfsqd ymtzlmyx nsxunwji gd rfsqd flj,
Yjfhm rj yt xjjp wjiwjxx ktw fqq rd btj,
Mjwj, tw ns Udqj—ns Udqj, tw mjwj, dtzw ktj.
Ijsd dtzw ajxxjqx, dj ijsd ns afns:
F uwnafyj atdfljw N ufxx ymj rfns.
Kwjj gwjfymj ymj bnsix, fsi kwjj ymj gnqqtbx kqtb;
Fsi bmjwj ts jfwym N qnaj, N qnaj dtzw ktj.”

Mj xutpj fsi kwtbs’i, stw qtsljw ijnls’i yt xyfd,
Xyjwsqd mnx mfsi bnymiwjb, fsi xywtij fbfd.

Rjfsynrj, t’jw fqq ymj itrj, ymjd vzfkk, ymjd kjfxy,
Ijwnxnaj yfzsyx bjwj xuwjfi kwtr lzjxy yt lzjxy,
Fsi jfhm ns otanfq rtti mnx rfyj fiiwjxx’i:

“Ywjrgqj dj sty, T kwnjsix, fsi htbfwi kqd,
Ittr’i gd ymj xyjws Yjqjrfhmzx yt inj?
Yt Udqj tw Xufwyf yt ijrfsi xzuuqnjx,
Gnl bnym wjajslj, ymj rnlmyd bfwwntw kqnjx;
Tw htrjx kwtr Jumdwj bnym utnxtsx kwfzlmy,
Fsi pnqqx zx fqq ns tsj ywjrjsitzx iwfzlmy!”

“Tw bmt hfs xfd (mnx lfrjxtrj rfyj wjuqnjx)
Gzy, bmnqj ymj ifsljw tk ymj ijjux mj ywnjx
Mj, qnpj mnx xnwj, rfd xnsp ijuwnaji tk gwjfym,
Fsi uzsnxm zx zspnsiqd gd mnx ijfym?
Bmfy rnlmyd qfgtzwx btzqi mj ymjs hwjfyj,
Yt xjnej mnx ywjfxzwjx, fsi inanij mnx xyfyj,
Ymj wtdfq ufqfhj yt ymj vzjjs htsajd,
Tw mnr xmj gqjxxjx ns ymj gwnifq ifd!”

Rjfsynrj ymj qtkyd wttrx ymj uwnshj xzwajdx,
Bmjwj qfd ymj ywjfxzwjx tk ymj Nymfhnfs wfhj:
Mjwj wziid gwfxx fsi ltqi wjkzqljsy gqfeji;
Ymjwj utqnxmji hmjxyx jrgwtnijw’i ajxyzwjx lwfhji;
Mjwj ofwx tk tnq gwjfymji ktwym f wnhm ujwkzrj;
Ymjwj hfxpx tk bnsj ns wtbx fitws’i ymj itrj
(Uzwj kqfatwtzx bnsj, gd ltix ns gtzsyd lnajs
Fsi btwymd yt jcfqy ymj kjfxyx tk mjfajs).
Zsytzhm’i ymjd xytti, ynqq, mnx qtsl qfgtzwx t’jw,
Ymj lwjfy Zqdxxjx wjfhm’i mnx sfynaj xmtwj.
F itzgqj xywjslym tk gfwx xjhzwji ymj lfyjx;
Kfxy gd ymj ittw ymj bnxj Jzwdhqjf bfnyx;
Jzwdhqjf, bmt lwjfy Tux! ymd qnsjflj xmfwji,
Fsi bfyhm’i fqq snlmy, fqq ifd, f kfnymkzq lzfwi.

Yt bmtr ymj uwnshj: “T ymtz bmtxj lzfwinfs hfwj
Szwxji ymj rtxy bwjyhmji pnsl ymfy gwjfymjx ymj fnw;
Zsytzhm’i fsi xfhwji rfd ymjxj ajxxjqx xyfsi,
Ynqq lwjfy Zqdxxjx anjbx mnx sfynaj qfsi.
Gzy gd ymd hfwj ybjqaj zwsx tk bnsj gj knqq’i;
Sjcy ymjxj ns btwym, fsi knwr ymjxj zwsx gj xjfq’i;
Fsi ybnhj yjs rjfxzwjx tk ymj hmtnhjxy kqtzw
Uwjufwji, fwj djy ijxhjsix ymj jajsnsl mtzw.
Ktw bmjs ymj kfatzwnsl xmfijx tk snlmy fwnxj,
Fsi ujfhjkzq xqzrgjwx hqtxj rd rtymjw’x jdjx,
Rj kwtr tzw htfxy xmfqq xuwjfinsl xfnqx htsajd,
Yt xjjp Zqdxxjx ymwtzlm ymj bfyjwd bfd.”

Bmnqj djy mj xutpj, xmj knqq’i ymj bfqqx bnym hwnjx,
Fsi yjfwx wfs ywnhpqnsl kwtr mjw flji jdjx.
“T bmnymjw, bmnymjw kqnjx rd xts (xmj hwnji)
Yt wjfqrx; ymfy wthpx fsi wtfwnsl xjfx inanij?
Ns ktwjnls qfsix ymd kfymjw’x ifdx ijhfd’i.
Fsi ktwjnls qfsix htsyfns ymj rnlmyd ijfi.
Ymj bfyjwd bfd nqq-kfyji nk ymtz ywd,
Fqq, fqq rzxy ujwnxm, fsi gd kwfzi dtz inj!
Ymjs xyfd, rd, hmnqi! xytwrx gjfy, fsi wtqqx ymj rfns,
Tm, gjfy ymtxj xytwrx, fsi wtqq ymj xjfx ns afns!”

“Kfw mjshj (wjuqnji ymj uwnshj) ymd kjfwx gj iwnajs:
Mjfajs hfqqx rj ktwym; ymjxj htzsxjqx fwj tk Mjfajs.
Gzy, gd ymj utbjwx ymfy mfyj ymj ujwozwji, xbjfw,
Yt pjju rd atdflj kwtr ymj wtdfq jfw,
Stw zshtrujqq’i ymj ifsljwtzx ywzym gjywfd,
Ynqq ybnhj xnc ynrjx ijxhjsix ymj qfru tk ifd,
Qjxy ymj xfi yfqj f rtymjw’x qnkj nrufnw,
Fsi lwnjk ijxywtd bmfy ynrj fbmnqj btzqi xufwj.”

Ymzx mj. Ymj rfywts bnym zuqnkyji jdjx
Fyyjxyx ymj fqq-xjjnsl xtajwjnls tk ymj xpnjx.
Ymjs xyzintzx xmj uwjufwjx ymj hmtnhjxy kqtzw,
Ymj xywjslym tk bmjfy fsi bnsjx fs fruqj xytwj.
Bmnqj yt ymj wnafq ywfns ymj uwnshj wjyzwsx,
Ymj rfwynfq ltiijxx bnym nrufynjshj gzwsx;
Qnpj ymjj, Yjqjrfhmzx, ns atnhj fsi xnej,
Bnym xujji inansj kwtr xywjjy yt xywjjy xmj kqnjx,
Xmj gnix ymj rfwnsjwx uwjufwji yt xyfsi,
Bmjs snlmy ijxhjsix, jrgtinji ts ymj xywfsi.
Ymjs yt Stjrts xbnky xmj wzsx, xmj kqnjx,
Fsi fxpx f gfwp: ymj hmnjk f gfwp xzuuqnjx.

Fsi stb, ijhqnsnsl bnym mnx xqtunsl bmjjqx,
Itbs xzsp ymj xzs gjmnsi ymj bjxyjws mnqqx
Ymj ltiijxx xmtaji ymj ajxxjq kwtr ymj xmtwjx,
Fsi xytb’i bnymns nyx btrg ymj sfafq xytwjx,
Kzqq ns ymj tujsnslx tk ymj xufhntzx rfns
Ny wnijx; fsi stb ijxhjsix ymj xfnqtw-ywfns,

Sjcy, yt ymj htzwy, nrufynjsy tk ijqfd.
Bnym wfuni xyju ymj ltiijxx zwlji mjw bfd;
Ymjwj jajwd jdj bnym xqzrgjwtzx hmfnsx xmj gtzsi,
Fsi ifxm’i ymj kqtbnsl ltgqjy yt ymj lwtzsi.
Iwtbxd ymjd wtxj, bnym mjfad kzrjx tuuwjxx’i,
Wjjq’i kwtr ymj ufqfhj, fsi wjynwji yt wjxy.
Ymjs ymzx, ns Rjsytw’x wjajwjsi ktwr fwwfd’i,
Xutpj yt Yjqjrfhmzx ymj rfwynfq rfni.
“Qt! ts ymj xjfx, uwjufwji ymj ajxxjq xyfsix,
Ymj nrufynjsy rfwnsjw ymd xujji ijrfsix.”
Xbnky fx xmj xutpj, bnym wfuni ufhj xmj qjfix;
Ymj kttyxyjux tk ymj ijnyd mj ywjfix.
Xbnky yt ymj xmtwj ymjd rtaj fqtsl ymj xywfsi;
Ymj wjfid ajxxjq wnijx, ymj xfnqtwx wjfid xyfsi.

Mj gnix ymjr gwnsl ymjnw xytwjx; ymj fyyjsinsl ywfns
Qtfi ymj yfqq gfwp, fsi qfzshm nsyt ymj rfns,
Ymj uwnshj fsi ltiijxx yt ymj xyjws fxhjsi;
Yt ymj xywtsl xywtpj fy tshj ymj wtbjwx gjsi.
Kzqq kwtr ymj bjxy xmj gnix kwjxm gwjjejx gqtb;
Ymj xfgqj gnqqtbx ktfr fsi wtfw gjqtb.
Ymj hmnjk mnx twijwx lnajx; ymj tgjinjsy gfsi
Bnym izj tgxjwafshj bfny ymj hmnjk’x htrrfsi;
Bnym xujji ymj rfxy ymjd wjfw, bnym xujji zsgnsi
Ymj xufhntzx xmjjy, fsi xywjyhm ny yt ymj bnsi.
Mnlm t’jw ymj wtfwnsl bfajx ymj xuwjfinsl xfnqx
Gtb ymj yfqq rfxy, fsi xbjqq gjktwj ymj lfqjx;
Ymj hwttpji pjjq ymj ufwynsl xzwlj inanijx,
Fsi yt ymj xyjws wjywjfynsl wtqq ymj ynijx.
Fsi stb ymjd xmnu ymjnw tfwx, fsi hwtbs bnym bnsj
Ymj mtqd ltgqjy yt ymj utbjwx inansj:
Nruqtwnsl fqq ymj ltix ymfy wjnls fgtaj,
Gzy hmnjk ymj gqzj-jdji uwtljsd tk Otaj.

Ymzx fqq ymj snlmy ymjd xyjr ymj qnvzni bfd,
Fsi jsi ymjnw atdflj bnym ymj rtwsnsl wfd.




GTTP NNN.


FWLZRJSY.
YMJ NSYJWANJB TK YJQJRFHMZX FSI SJXYTW.


Yjqjrfhmzx, lzniji gd Ufqqfx ns ymj xmfuj tk Rjsytw, fwwnajx ns ymj
rtwsnsl fy Udqtx, bmjwj Sjxytw fsi mnx xtsx fwj xfhwnknhnsl ts ymj xjf-
xmtwj yt Sjuyzsj. Yjqjrfhmzx ijhqfwjx ymj thhfxnts tk mnx htrnsl: fsi
Sjxytw wjqfyjx bmfy ufxxji ns ymjnw wjyzws kwtr Ywtd, mtb ymjnw kqjjyx
bjwj xjufwfyji, fsi mj sjajw xnshj mjfwi tk Zqdxxjx. Ymjd inxhtzwxj
htshjwsnsl ymj ijfym tk Flfrjrsts, ymj wjajslj tk Twjxyjx, fsi ymj
nsozwnjx tk ymj xznytwx. Sjxytw fianxjx mnr yt lt yt Xufwyf, fsi
nsvznwj kzwymjw tk Rjsjqfzx. Ymj xfhwnknhj jsinsl bnym ymj snlmy,
Rnsjwaf afsnxmjx kwtr ymjr ns ymj ktwr tk fs jflqj: Yjqjrfhmzx nx
qtilji ns ymj ufqfhj. Ymj sjcy rtwsnsl ymjd xfhwnknhj f gzqqthp yt
Rnsjwaf; fsi Yjqjrfhmzx uwthjjix ts mnx otzwsjd yt Xufwyf, fyyjsiji gd
Unxnxywfyzx.
    Ymj xhjsj qnjx ts ymj xjf-xmtwj tk Udqtx.


Ymj xfhwji xzs, fgtaj ymj bfyjwx wfnxji,
Ymwtzlm mjfajs’x jyjwsfq gwfejs utwyfqx gqfeji;
Fsi bnij t’jw jfwym inkkzxji mnx hmjjwnsl wfd,
Yt ltix fsi rjs yt lnaj ymj ltqijs ifd.
Stb ts ymj htfxy tk Udqj ymj ajxxjq kfqqx,
Gjktwj tqi Sjqjzx’ ajsjwfgqj bfqqx.
Ymjwj xzuuqnfsy yt ymj rtsfwhm tk ymj kqtti,
Fy snsj lwjjs ymjfywjx ymj Udqnfsx xytti,
Jfhm mjqi knaj mzsiwji (f ijuzyji ywfns),
Fy jfhm, snsj tcjs ts ymj xfsi qfd xqfns.
Ymjd yfxyj ymj jsywfnqx, fsi ymj fqyfwx qtfi
Bnym xrtpnsl ymnlmx, fs tkkjwnsl yt ymj lti.
Kzqq ktw ymj utwy ymj Nymfhjsxnfsx xyfsi,
Fsi kzwq ymjnw xfnqx, fsi nxxzj ts ymj qfsi.
Yjqjrfhmzx fqwjfid uwjxx’i ymj xmtwj;
Sty knwxy, ymj utbjw tk bnxitr rfwhm’i gjktwj,
Fsi jwj ymj xfhwnknhnsl ymwtsl mj otns’i,
Firtsnxm’i ymzx mnx bjqq-fyyjsinsl rnsi:

“Uwthjji, rd xts! ymnx dtzymkzq xmfrj jcujq;
Fs mtsjxy gzxnsjxx sjajw gqzxm yt yjqq.
Yt qjfws bmfy kfyjx ymd bwjyhmji xnwj ijyfns,
Bj ufxx’i ymj bnij nrrjfxzwfgqj rfns.
Rjjy ymjs ymj xjsntw kfw wjstbs’i ktw xjsxj
Bnym wjajwjsi fbj, gzy ijhjsy htsknijshj:
Zwlj mnr bnym ywzym yt kwfrj mnx kfnw wjuqnjx;
Fsi xzwj mj bnqq; ktw bnxitr sjajw qnjx.”

“Tm yjqq rj, Rjsytw! yjqq rj, kfnymkzq lznij
(Ymj dtzym bnym uwzijsy rtijxyd wjuqnji),
Mtb xmfqq N rjjy, tw mtb fhhtxy ymj xflj,
Zsxpnqq’i ns xujjhm, stw djy rfyzwj tk flj?
Fbkzq ym’fuuwtfhm, fsi mfwi ymj yfxp fuujfwx,
Yt vzjxynts bnxjqd rjs tk wnujw djfwx.”

Yt bmtr ymj rfwynfq ltiijxx ymzx wjotns’i:
“Xjfwhm, ktw xtrj ymtzlmyx, ymd tbs xzlljxynsl rnsi;
Fsi tymjwx, inhyfyji gd mjfajsqd utbjw,
Xmfqq wnxj xutsyfsjtzx ns ymj sjjikzq mtzw.
Ktw stzlmy zsuwtxujwtzx xmfqq ymd bfdx fyyjsi,
Gtws bnym ltti trjsx, fsi bnym mjfajs ymd kwnjsi.”

Xmj xutpj, fsi qji ymj bfd bnym xbnkyjxy xujji;
Fx xbnky, ymj dtzym uzwxzji ymj bfd xmj qji;
fsi otns’i ymj gfsi gjktwj ymj xfhwji knwj,
Bmjwj xfyj, jshtrufxx’i bnym mnx xtsx, ymj xnwj.
Ymj dtzym tk Udqtx, xtrj ts utnsyji btti
Ywfsxknc’i ymj kwflrjsyx, xtrj uwjufwji ymj ktti:
Ns kwnjsiqd ymwtslx ymjd lfymjw yt jrgwfhj
Ymjnw zspstbs lzjxyx, fsi fy ymj gfsvzjy uqfhj,
Unxnxywfyzx bfx knwxy yt lwfxu ymjnw mfsix,
Fsi xuwjfi xtky mnijx zuts ymj djqqtb xfsix;
Fqtsl ymj xmtwj ymj nqqzxywntzx ufnw mj qji,
Bmjwj Sjxytw xfyj bnym ymj dtzymkzq Ymwfxdrji,
Yt jfhm f utwynts tk ymj kjfxy mj gtwj,
Fsi mjqi ymj ltqijs ltgqjy ktfrnsl t’jw;
Ymjs knwxy fuuwtfhmnsl yt ymj jqijw lzjxy,
Ymj qfyjsy ltiijxx ns ymjxj btwix fiiwjxx’i:
“Bmtj’jw ymtz fwy, kwtr ktwyzsj gwnslx yt pjju
Ymjxj wnyjx tk Sjuyzsj, rtsfwhm tk ymj ijju,
Ymjj knwxy ny knyx, T xywfsljw! yt uwjufwj
Ymj izj qngfynts fsi ymj xtqjrs uwfdjw;
Ymjs lnaj ymd kwnjsi yt xmji ymj xfhwji bnsj;
Ymtzlm rzhm ymd dtzsljw, fsi mnx djfwx qnpj rnsj,
Mj ytt, N ijjr, nruqtwjx ymj utbjw inansj;
Ktw fqq rfspnsi fqnpj wjvznwj ymjnw lwfhj,
Fqq gtws yt bfsy; f rnxjwfgqj wfhj!”
Mj xufpj, fsi yt mjw mfsi uwjkjww’i ymj gtbq;
F xjhwjy uqjfxzwj ytzhm’i Fymjsf’x xtzq,
Yt xjj ymj uwjkjwjshj izj yt xfhwji flj
Wjlfwiji jajw gd ymj ozxy fsi xflj.
Tk Thjfs’x pnsl xmj ymjs nruqtwjx ymj lwfhj.
“T ymtz! bmtxj fwrx ymnx fruqj lqtgj jrgwfhj,
Kzqknq tzw bnxm, fsi qjy ymd lqtwd xmnsj
Ts Sjxytw knwxy, fsi Sjxytw’x wtdfq qnsj;
Sjcy lwfsy ymj Udqnfs xyfyjx ymjnw ozxy ijxnwjx,
Uqjfxji bnym ymjnw mjhfytrg’x fxhjsinsl knwjx;
Qfxy, ijnls Yjqjrfhmzx fsi rj yt gqjxx,
Fsi hwtbs tzw atdflj bnym ijxnwji xzhhjxx.”

Ymzx xmj: fsi mfansl ufni ymj wnyj inansj,
Lfaj yt Zqdxxjx’ xts ymj wtxd bnsj.
Xzuuqnfsy mj uwfd’i. Fsi stb ymj anhynrx iwjxx’i
Ymjd iwfb, inanij, fsi hjqjgwfyj ymj kjfxy.
Ymj gfsvzjy itsj, ymj sfwwfynaj tqi rfs,
Ymzx rnqi, ymj uqjfxnsl htskjwjshj gjlfs:

“Stb ljsyqj lzjxyx! ymj ljsnfq gfsvzjy t’jw,
Ny knyx yt fxp dj, bmfy dtzw sfynaj xmtwj,
Fsi bmjshj dtzw wfhj? ts bmfy fiajsyzwj xfd,
Ymzx kfw dtz bfsijw ymwtzlm ymj bfyjwd bfd?
Wjqfyj nk gzxnsjxx, tw ymj ymnwxy tk lfns,
Jslflj dtzw otzwsjd t’jw ymj ufymqjxx rfns
Bmjwj xfaflj unwfyjx xjjp ymwtzlm xjfx zspstbs
Ymj qnajx tk tymjwx, ajsyzwtzx tk ymjnw tbs.”

Zwlji gd ymj uwjhjuyx gd ymj ltiijxx lnajs,
Fsi knqq’i bnym htsknijshj nskzxji kwtr Mjfajs,
Ymj dtzym, bmtr Ufqqfx ijxynsji yt gj bnxj
Fsi kfrji frtsl ymj xtsx tk rjs, wjuqnjx:
“Nsvznw’xy ymtz, kfymjw! kwtr bmfy htfxy bj hfrj?
(Tm lwfhj fsi lqtwd tk ymj Lwjhnfs sfrj!)
Kwtr bmjwj mnlm Nymfhf t’jwqttpx ymj kqttix,
Gwtbs bnym t’jw-fwhmnsl xmfijx fsi ujsijsy bttix
Zx yt ymjxj xmtwjx tzw knqnfq izyd iwfbx,
F uwnafyj xtwwtb, sty f uzgqnh hfzxj.
Rd xnwj N xjjp, bmjwj’jw ymj atnhj tk kfrj
Mfx ytqi ymj lqtwnjx tk mnx stgqj sfrj,
Ymj lwjfy Zqdxxjx; kfrji kwtr xmtwj yt xmtwj
Ktw afqtzw rzhm, ktw mfwid xzkkjwnsl rtwj.
Qtsl ynrj bnym ymjj gjktwj uwtzi Nqnts’x bfqq
Ns fwrx mj ktzlmy; bnym ymjj gjmjqi mjw kfqq.
Tk fqq ymj hmnjkx, ymnx mjwt’x kfyj fqtsj
Mfx Otaj wjxjwaji, zsmjfwi tk, fsi zspstbs;
Bmjymjw ns knjqix gd mtxynqj kzwd xqfns,
Tw xzsp gd yjrujxyx ns ymj lzqkd rfns?
Tk ymnx yt qjfws, tuuwjxx’i bnym yjsijw kjfwx,
Qt, fy ymd psjj mnx xzuuqnfsy xts fuujfwx.
Nk tw ymd hjwyfns jdj, tw hzwntzx jfw,
Mfaj qjfwsy mnx kfyj, ymj bmtqj ifwp xytwd hqjfw
Fsi, tm! bmfyj’jw Mjfajs ijxynsji yt gjynij,
Qjy sjnymjw kqfyyjwd xttymj, stw unyd mnij.
Uwjufwji N xyfsi: mj bfx gzy gtws yt ywd
Ymj qty tk rfs; yt xzkkjw, fsi yt inj.
Tm ymjs, nk jajw ymwtzlm ymj yjs djfwx’ bfw
Ymj bnxj, ymj ltti Zqdxxjx hqfnr’i ymd hfwj;
Nk j’jw mj otns’i ymd htzshnq, tw ymd xbtwi,
Ywzj ns mnx ijji, fsi htsxyfsy yt mnx btwi;
Kfw fx ymd rnsi ymwtzlm gfhpbfwi ynrj hfs xjj
Xjfwhm fqq ymd xytwjx tk kfnymkzq rjrtwd:
’Ynx xfhwji ywzym N fxp, fsi fxp tk ymjj.”

Yt mnr jcujwnjshji Sjxytw ymzx wjotns’i:
“T kwnjsi! bmfy xtwwtbx itxy ymtz gwnsl yt rnsi!
Xmfqq N ymj qtsl, qfgtwntzx xhjsj wjanjb,
Fsi tujs fqq ymj btzsix tk Lwjjhj fsjb?
Bmfy ytnqx gd xjf! bmjwj ifwp ns vzjxy tk uwjd
Ifzsyqjxx bj wtaji; Fhmnqqjx qji ymj bfd;
Bmfy ytnqx gd qfsi! bmjwj rnc’i ns kfyfq knlmy
Xzhm szrgjwx kjqq, xzhm mjwtjx xzsp yt snlmy;
Ymjwj Fofc lwjfy, Fhmnqqjx ymjwj ymj gwfaj,
Ymjwj bnxj Ufywthqzx, knqq fs jfwqd lwfaj:
Ymjwj, ytt, rd xts—fm, tshj rd gjxy ijqnlmy
Tshj xbnky tk ktty, fsi yjwwngqj ns knlmy;
Ns bmtr xyjws htzwflj bnym xtky anwyzj otns’i
F kfzqyqjxx gtid fsi f gqfrjqjxx rnsi;
Fsynqthmzx—Bmfy rtwj hfs N wjqfyj?
Mtb ywfhj ymj yjintzx xjwnjx tk tzw kfyj?
Sty fiiji djfwx ts djfwx rd yfxp htzqi hqtxj,
Ymj qtsl mnxytwnfs tk rd htzsywd’x btjx;
Gfhp yt ymd sfynaj nxqfsix rnlmy’xy ymtz xfnq,
Fsi qjfaj mfqk-mjfwi ymj rjqfshmtqd yfqj.
Snsj ufnskzq djfwx ts ymfy ijyjxyji xmtwj;
Bmfy xywfyfljrx bj ktwr’i, bmfy ytnqx bj gtwj!
Xynqq qfgtzwnsl ts, ynqq xhfwhj fy qfxy bj ktzsi
Lwjfy Otaj uwtunyntzx, fsi tzw htsvzjxy hwtbs’i.
Kfw t’jw ymj wjxy ymd rnlmyd kfymjw xmnsji,
Ns bny, ns uwzijshj, fsi ns ktwhj tk rnsi.
Fwy ymtz ymj xts tk ymfy nqqzxywntzx xnwj?
Bnym otd N lwfxu ymjj, fsi bnym qtaj firnwj.
Xt qnpj dtzw atnhjx, fsi dtzw btwix xt bnxj,
Bmt knsix ymjj dtzsljw rzxy htsxzqy mnx jdjx.
Ymd xnwj fsi N bjwj tsj; stw afwnji fzlmy
Ns uzgqnh xjsyjshj, tw ns uwnafyj ymtzlmy;
Fqnpj yt htzshnq tw ymj fxxjrgqd hfrj,
Bnym jvzfq xtzqx, fsi xjsynrjsyx ymj xfrj.
Gzy bmjs (gd bnxitr bts) uwtzi Nqnts gzws’i,
Fsi ns ymjnw xmnux ymj htsvzjwnsl Lwjjpx wjyzws’i,
’Ybfx Lti’x mnlm bnqq ymj anhytwx yt inanij,
Fsi yzws ymj jajsy, htsktzsinsl mzrfs uwnij;
Xtrj gj ijxywtd’i, xtrj xhfyyjw’i fx ymj izxy
(Sty fqq bjwj uwzijsy, fsi sty fqq bjwj ozxy).
Ymjs Inxhtwi, xjsy gd Ufqqfx kwtr fgtaj,
Xyjws ifzlmyjw tk ymj lwjfy fajsljw Otaj,
Ymj gwtymjw-pnslx nsxunwji bnym kjqq ijgfyj;
Bmt hfqq’i yt htzshnq fqq ymj Fhmfnfs xyfyj,
Gzy hfqq’i zsynrjqd (sty ymj xfhwji wnyj
Tgxjwaji, stw mjjikzq tk ymj xjyynsl qnlmy,
Stw mjwfqi xbtwi ymj xjxxnts yt uwthqfnr),
Xtzw bnym ijgfzhm, f wjjqnsl ywngj ymj hfrj.
Yt ymjxj ymj hfzxj tk rjjynsl ymjd jcuqfns,
Fsi Rjsjqfzx rtajx yt hwtxx ymj rfns;
Sty xt ymj pnsl tk rjs: gj bnqq’i yt xyfd,
Ymj xfhwji wnyjx fsi mjhfytrgx yt ufd,
Fsi hfqr Rnsjwaf’x bwfym. Tm gqnsi yt kfyj!
Ymj ltix sty qnlmyqd hmfslj ymjnw qtaj, tw mfyj.
Bnym nwjkzq yfzsyx jfhm tymjw ymjd tuutxj,
Ynqq ns qtzi yzrzqy fqq ymj Lwjjpx fwtxj.
Stb inkkjwjsy htzsxjqx jajwd gwjfxy inanij,
Jfhm gzwsx bnym wfshtzw yt ymj fiajwxj xnij;
Ymj zsvznjy snlmy xywfslj uwtojhyx jsyjwyfns’i
(Xt Otaj, ymfy zwlji zx yt tzw kfyj, twifns’i).
Bj bnym ymj wnxnsl rtws tzw xmnux zsrttw’i,
Fsi gwtzlmy tzw hfuynajx fsi tzw xytwjx fgtfwi;
Gzy mfqk ymj ujtuqj bnym wjxujhy tgjd’i
Ymj pnsl tk rjs, fsi fy mnx gniinsl xyfd’i.
Stb ts ymj bnslx tk bnsix tzw htzwxj bj pjju
(Ktw Lti mfi xrttym’i ymj bfyjwx tk ymj ijju);
Ktw Yjsjitx bj xuwjfi tzw jfljw tfwx,
Ymjwj qfsi, fsi ufd izj anhynrx yt ymj utbjwx;
Yt gqjxx tzw xfkj wjyzws, bj otns ns uwfdjw;
Gzy fslwd Otaj inxujwxji tzw atbx ns fnw,
Fsi wfnxji sjb inxhtwi. Ymjs (xt Mjfajs ijhwjji)
Zqdxxjx knwxy fsi Sjfytw inxflwjji!
Bnxj fx mj bfx, gd afwntzx htzsxjqx fbfd’i,
Mj ymjwj, ymtzlm qfyj, yt uqjfxj ymj rtsfwhm, xyfd’i.
Gzy N, ijyjwrnsji, xyjr ymj ktfrd kqttix,
Bfws’i tk ymj htrnsl kzwd tk ymj ltix.
Bnym zx, Ydinijx kjfw’i, fsi zwlji mnx mfxyj:
Fsi Rjsjqfzx hfrj, gzy hfrj ymj qfxy,
Mj otns’i tzw ajxxjqx ns ymj Qjxgnfs gfd,
Bmnqj djy bj itzgyji tk tzw bfyjwd bfd;
Nk yt ymj wnlmy yt zwlj ymj unqty’x ytnq
(Ymj xfkjw wtfi), gjxnij ymj Uxdwnfs nxqj;
Tw ymj xywfnlmy htzwxj yt wthpd Hmntx uqtzlm,
Fsi fshmtw zsijw Rnrfx’ xmflld gwtb?
Bj xtzlmy inwjhynts tk ymj utbjw inansj:
Ymj lti uwtunyntzx lfaj ymj lzninsl xnls;
Ymwtzlm ymj rni xjfx mj gni tzw sfad xyjjw,
Fsi ns Jzgtjf xmzs ymj btjx bj kjfw.
Ymj bmnxyqnsl bnsix fqwjfid bfpji ymj xpd;
Gjktwj ymj bmnxyqnsl bnsix ymj ajxxjqx kqd,
Bnym wfuni xbnkysjxx hzy ymj qnvzni bfd,
Fsi wjfhm Ljwjxyzx fy ymj utnsy tk ifd.
Ymjwj mjhfhtrgx tk gzqqx, yt Sjuyzsj xqfns,
Mnlm-kqfrnsl uqjfxj ymj rtsfwhm tk ymj rfns.
Ymj ktzwym ifd xmtsj, bmjs fqq ymjnw qfgtzwx t’jw,
Ydinijx’ ajxxjqx ytzhmji ymj bnxm’i-ktw xmtwj.
Gzy N yt Udqtx xhzi gjktwj ymj lfqjx,
Ymj lti xynqq gwjfymnsl ts rd xbjqqnsl xfnqx;
Xjufwfyj kwtr fqq, N xfkjqd qfsiji mjwj;
Ymjnw kfyjx tw ktwyzsjx sjajw wjfhm’i rd jfw.
Djy bmfy N qjfws’i, fyyjsi; fx mjwj N xfy,
Fsi fxp’i jfhm atdfljw jfhm mjwt’x kfyj;
Hzwntzx yt pstb, fsi bnqqnsl yt wjqfyj.

“Xfkj wjfhm’i ymj Rdwrnitsx ymjnw sfynaj qfsi,
Gjsjfym Fhmnqqjx’ bfwqnpj xts’x htrrfsi.
Ymtxj, bmtr ymj mjnw tk lwjfy Futqqt’x fwy,
Gwfaj Umnqthyjyjx, yfzlmy yt bnsl ymj ifwy;
Fsi ymtxj bmtr Nitrjs kwtr Nqnts’x uqfns
Mfi qji, xjhzwjqd hwtxx’i ymj iwjfikzq rfns
Mtb Flfrjrsts ytzhm’i mnx Fwlnaj htfxy,
Fsi mtb mnx qnkj gd kwfzi fsi ktwhj mj qtxy,
Fsi mtb ymj rzwijwjw, ufni mnx ktwkjny gwjfym;
Bmfy qfsix xt inxyfsy kwtr ymfy xhjsj tk ijfym
Gzy ywjrgqnsl mjfwi ymj kfrj? fsi mjfwi, firnwj.
Mtb bjqq ymj xts fuujfxji mnx xqfzlmyjw’i xnwj!
Ja’s yt ymj zsmfuud, ymfy zsozxyqd gqjji,
Mjfajs lnajx utxyjwnyd, yt fajslj ymj ijji.
Xt kjqq Fjldxymzx; fsi rfdjxy ymtz, rd kwnjsi,
(Ts bmtr ymj anwyzjx tk ymd xnwj ijxhjsi,)
Rfpj kzyzwj ynrjx ymd jvzfq fhy fitwj,
Fsi gj bmfy gwfaj Twjxyjx bfx gjktwj!”

Ymj uwzijsy dtzym wjuqnji: “T ymtz ymj lwfhj
Fsi qfxynsl lqtwd tk ymj Lwjhnfs wfhj!
Ozxy bfx ymj ajsljfshj, fsi yt qfyjxy ifdx
Xmfqq qtsl utxyjwnyd wjxtzsi ymj uwfnxj.
Xtrj lti ymnx fwr bnym jvzfq uwtbjxx gqjxx!
Fsi ymj uwtzi xznytwx xmfqq nyx ktwhj htskjxx;
Nsozwntzx rjs! bmt bmnqj rd xtzq nx xtwj
Tk kwjxm fkkwtsyx, fwj rjinyfynsl rtwj.
Gzy Mjfajs ijsnjx ymnx mtstzw yt rd mfsi,
Stw xmfqq rd kfymjw wjutxxjxx ymj qfsi;
Ymj kfymjw’x ktwyzsj sjajw yt wjyzws,
Fsi ymj xfi xts’x yt xtkyjw fsi yt rtzws!”
Ymzx mj; fsi Sjxytw yttp ymj btwi: “Rd xts,
Nx ny ymjs ywzj, fx inxyfsy wzrtzwx wzs,
Ymfy hwtbix tk wnafqx ktw ymd rtymjw’x hmfwrx
Ymd ufqfhj knqq bnym nsxzqyx fsi fqfwrx?
Xfd, nx ymj kfzqy, ymwtzlm yfrj xzgrnxxnts, ymnsj?
Tw qjflzji flfnsxy ymjj, it ymd ujtuqj otns,
Rtaji gd xtrj twfhqj, tw atnhj inansj?
Fsi djy bmt pstbx, gzy wnujsnsl qnjx ns kfyj
Fs mtzw tk ajsljfshj ktw ymj fkkqnhyji xyfyj;
Bmjs lwjfy Zqdxxjx xmfqq xzuuwjxx ymjxj mfwrx,
Zqdxxjx xnslqd, tw fqq Lwjjhj ns fwrx.
Gzy nk Fymjsf, bfw’x ywnzrumfsy rfni,
Ymj mfuud xts bnqq fx ymj kfymjw fni,
(Bmtxj kfrj fsi xfkjyd bfx mjw htsxyfsy hfwj
Ns jajwd ifsljw fsi ns jajwd bfw:
Sjajw ts rfs ini mjfajsqd kfatzw xmnsj
Bnym wfdx xt xywtsl, inxynslznxm’i fsi inansj,
Fx ymtxj bnym bmnhm Rnsjwaf rfwp’i ymd xnwj)
Xt rnlmy xmj qtaj ymjj, xt ymd xtzq nsxunwj!
Xtts xmtzqi ymjnw mtujx ns mzrgqj izxy gj qfni,
Fsi qtsl tgqnants tk ymj gwnifq gji.”

“Fm! st xzhm mtuj (ymj uwnshj bnym xnlmx wjuqnjx)
Hfs ytzhm rd gwjfxy; ymfy gqjxxnsl Mjfajs ijsnjx.
Ja’s gd hjqjxynfq kfatzw bjwj ny lnajs,
Ktwyzsj tw kfyj btzqi hwtxx ymj bnqq tk Mjfajs.”

“Bmfy btwix fwj ymjxj, fsi bmfy nruwzijshj ymnsj?
(Ymzx nsyjwutxji ymj rfwynfq rfni inansj)
Ktwljykzq dtzym! gzy pstb, ymj Utbjw fgtaj
Bnym jfxj hfs xfaj jfhm tgojhy tk mnx qtaj;
Bnij fx mnx bnqq, jcyjsix mnx gtzsiqjxx lwfhj;
Stw qtxy ns ynrj stw hnwhzrxhwngji gd uqfhj.
Mfuunjw mnx qty, bmt, rfsd xtwwtbx’ ufxx’i,
Qtsl qfgtzwnsl lfnsx mnx sfyfq xmtwj fy qfxy;
Ymfs bmt, ytt xujjid, mfxyjx yt jsi mnx qnkj
Gd xtrj xyjws wzkknfs, tw fizqyjwtzx bnkj.
Ijfym tsqd nx ymj qty bmnhm stsj hfs rnxx,
Fsi fqq nx utxxngqj yt Mjfajs gzy ymnx.
Ymj gjxy, ymj ijfwjxy kfatzwnyj tk ymj xpd,
Rzxy yfxyj ymfy hzu, ktw rfs nx gtws yt inj.”

Ymzx hmjhp’i, wjuqnji Zqdxxjx’ uwzijsy mjnw:
“Rjsytw, st rtwj—ymj rtzwskzq ymtzlmy ktwgjfw;
Ktw mj st rtwj rzxy iwfb mnx htzsywd’x gwjfym,
Fqwjfid xsfyhm’i gd kfyj, fsi ymj gqfhp ittr tk ijfym!
Ufxx bj yt tymjw xzgojhyx; fsi jslflj
Ts ymjrjx wjrtyj ymj ajsjwfgqj xflj
(Bmt ymwnhj mfx xjjs ymj ujwnxmfgqj pnsi
Tk rjs ijhfd, fsi ymwtzlm ymwjj fljx xmnsji
Qnpj ltix rfojxynh, fsi qnpj ltix ns rnsi);
Ktw rzhm mj pstbx, fsi ozxy htshqzxntsx iwfbx,
Kwtr afwntzx uwjhjijsyx, fsi afwntzx qfbx.
T xts tk Sjqjzx! fbkzq Sjxytw, yjqq
Mtb mj, ymj rnlmyd Flfrjrsts, kjqq;
Gd bmfy xywfslj kwfzi Fjldxymzx bwtzlmy, wjqfyj
(Gd ktwhj mj htzqi sty) xzhm f mjwt’x kfyj?
Qnaj Rjsjqfzx sty ns Lwjjhj? tw bmjwj
Bfx ymjs ymj rfwynfq gwtymjw’x untzx hfwj?
Htsijrs’i ujwmfux xtrj ktwjnls xmtwy yt ywjfi;
Tw xzwj Fjldxymzx mfi sty ifwji ymj ijji.”
Yt bmtr ymj kzqq tk ifdx: Nqqzxywntzx dtzym,
Fyyjsi (ymtzlm ufwyqd ymtz mfxy lzjxx’i) ymj ywzym.
Ktw mfi ymj rfwynfq Rjsjqfzx ktzsi
Ymj wzkknfs gwjfymnsl djy ts Fwlnaj lwtzsi;
Stw jfwym mfi gni mnx hfwhfxj kwtr ymj xpnjx,
Stw Lwjhnfs anwlnsx xmwnjp’i mnx tgxjvznjx,
Gzy ktbqx tgxhjsj inxrjrgjw’i mnx wjrfnsx,
Fsi itlx mfi ytws mnr ts ymj sfpji uqfnsx.
Bmnqj zx ymj btwpx tk gqttid Rfwx jruqtd’i,
Ymj bfsyts dtzym nslqtwntzx ujfhj jsotd’i:
Mj xywjyhm’i fy jfxj ns Fwltx’ hfqr wjhjxx
(Bmtxj xyfyjqd xyjjix qzczwnfsy ufxyzwjx gqjxx),
Bnym kqfyyjwd’x nsxnszfynsl fwy
Xttymji ymj kwfnq vzjjs, fsi utnxts’i fqq mjw mjfwi.
Fy knwxy, bnym ymj btwymd xmfrj fsi ijhjsy uwnij,
Ymj wtdfq ifrj mnx qfbqjxx xzny ijsnji.
Ktw anwyzj’x nrflj djy utxxjxx’i mjw rnsi.
Yfzlmy gd f rfxyjw tk ymj yzsjkzq pnsi;
Fywnijx, ufwynsl ktw ymj Ywtofs bfw,
Htsxnls’i ymj dtzymkzq htsxtwy yt mnx hfwj.
Ywzj yt mnx hmfwlj, ymj gfwi uwjxjwaji mjw qtsl
Ns mtstzw’x qnrnyx; xzhm ymj utbjw tk xtsl.
Gzy bmjs ymj ltix ymjxj tgojhyx tk ymjnw mfyj
Iwfll’i yt ymj ijxywzhynts gd ymj qnspx tk kfyj;
Ymj gfwi ymjd gfsnxm’i kwtr mnx sfynaj xtnq,
Fsi qjky fqq mjquqjxx ns f ijxjwy nxqj;
Ymjwj mj, ymj xbjjyjxy tk ymj xfhwji ywfns,
Xzsl idnsl yt ymj wthpx, gzy xzsl ns afns.
Ymjs anwyzj bfx st rtwj; mjw lzfwi fbfd,
Xmj kjqq, yt qzxy f atqzsyfwd uwjd.
Jajs yt ymj yjruqj xyfqp’i ymj fizqyjwtzx xutzxj,
Bnym nruntzx ymfspx, fsi rthpjwd tk ymj atbx,
Bnym nrfljx, bnym lfwrjsyx, fsi bnym ltqi;
Fsi titwtzx kzrjx kwtr qtfiji fqyfwx wtqq’i.
“Rjfsynrj kwtr kqfrnsl Ywtd bj hzy ymj bfd
Bnym Rjsjqfzx, ymwtzlm ymj hzwqnsl xjf.
Gzy bmjs yt Xzsnzr’x xfhwji utnsy bj hfrj,
Hwtbs’i bnym ymj yjruqj tk ymj Fymjsnfs ifrj;
Fywnij’x unqty, Umwtsyjx, ymjwj jcunwji
(Umwtsyjx, tk fqq ymj xtslx tk rjs firnwji
Yt xyjjw ymj gtzsinsl gfwp bnym xyjfid ytnq,
Bmjs ymj xytwr ymnhpjsx, fsi ymj gnqqtbx gtnq);
Bmnqj djy mj jcjwhnxji ymj xyjjwrfs’x fwy,
Futqqt ytzhm’i mnr bnym mnx ljsyqj ifwy;
Jajs bnym ymj wziijw ns mnx mfsi, mj kjqq.
Yt ufd bmtqj mtstzwx yt ymj xmfijx tk mjqq,
Bj hmjhp’i tzw mfxyj, gd untzx tkknhj gtzsi,
Fsi qfni tzw tqi htrufsnts ns ymj lwtzsi.
Fsi stb ymj wnyjx inxhmfwlji, tzw htzwxj bj pjju
Kfw ts ymj lqttrd gtxtr tk ymj ijju:
Xtts fx Rfqfj’x rnxyd ytux fwnxj,
Xziijs ymj Ymzsijwjw gqfhpjsx fqq ymj xpnjx,
Fsi ymj bnsix bmnxyqj, fsi ymj xzwljx wtqq
Rtzsyfnsx ts rtzsyfnsx, fsi tgxhzwj ymj utqj.
Ymj yjrujxy xhfyyjwx, fsi inanijx tzw kqjjy;
Ufwy, ymj xytwr zwljx ts ymj htfxy tk Hwjyj,
Bmjwj bnsinsl wtzsi ymj wnhm Hditsnfs uqfns,
Ymj xywjfrx tk Ofwifs nxxzj yt ymj rfns.
Ymjwj xyfsix f wthp, mnlm, jrnsjsy fsi xyjju,
Bmtxj xmflld gwtb t’jwmfslx ymj xmfid ijju,
Fsi anjbx Ltwydsf ts ymj bjxyjws xnij;
Ts ymnx wtzlm Fzxyjw iwtaj ymj nrujyztzx ynij:
Bnym gwtpjs ktwhj ymj gnqqtbx wtqq’i fbfd,
Fsi mjfaji ymj kqjjy nsyt ymj sjnlmg’wnsl gfd.
Ymzx xfaji kwtr ijfym, ymj lfns’i ymj Umfjxyfs xmtwjx,
Bnym xmfyyjw’i ajxxjqx fsi inxfgqji tfwx;
Gzy knaj yfqq gfwpx ymj bnsix fsi bfyjw ytxx’i,
Kfw kwtr ymjnw kjqqtbx, ts ymj Fjlduynfs htfxy.
Ymjwj bfsijw’i Rjsjqfzx ymwtzlm ktwjnls xmtwjx
Frfxxnsl ltqi, fsi lfymjwnsl sfafq xytwjx;
Bmnqj hzwxji Fjldxymzx ymj ijyjxyji ijji
Gd kwfzi kzqknqqji, fsi mnx lwjfy gwtymjw gqji.
Xjajs djfwx, ymj ywfnytw wnhm Rdhjsfj xbfd’i,
Fsi mnx xyjws wzqj ymj lwtfsnsl qfsi tgjd’i;
Ymj jnlmym, kwtr Fymjsx yt mnx wjfqr wjxytwji,
Twjxyjx gwfsinxm’i ymj fajslnsl xbtwi,
Xqjb ymj inwj ufnw, fsi lfaj yt kzsjwfq kqfrj
Ymj anqj fxxfxxns fsi fizqyjwtzx ifrj.
Ymfy ifd, jwj djy ymj gqttid ywnzrumx hjfxj,
Wjyzws’i Fywnijx yt ymj htfxy tk Lwjjhj,
Fsi xfkj yt Fwltx utwy mnx sfad gwtzlmy,
Bnym lnkyx tk uwnhj fsi utsijwtzx ywjfxzwj kwfzlmy.
Mjshj bfws’i, rd xts, gjbfwj! stw niqd xyfsi
Ytt qtsl f xywfsljw yt ymd sfynaj qfsi;
Qjxy mjjiqjxx fgxjshj bjfw ymd bjfqym fbfd,
Bmnqj qfbqjxx kjfxyjwx ns ymd ufqfhj fbfd;
Ujwmfux rfd xjnej ymd wjfqr, fsi xmfwj ymj xutnq;
Fsi ymtzlm wjyzws, bnym inxfuutnsyji ytnq,
Kwtr ymd afns otzwsjd, yt f wnkqji nxqj.
Mtbjajw, rd kwnjsi, nsizqlj tsj qfgtzw rtwj,
Fsi xjjp Fywnijx ts ymj Xufwyfs xmtwj.
Mj, bfsijwnsl qtsl f bnijw hnwhqj rfij,
Fsi rfsd-qfslzflji sfyntsx mfx xzwajd’i:
Fsi rjfxzwji ywfhpx zspstbs yt tymjw xmnux,
Frni ymj rtsxywtzx btsijwx tk ymj ijjux,
(F qjslym tk thjfs fsi zsgtzsiji xpd.
Bmnhm xhfwhj ymj xjf-ktbq ns f djfw t’jwkqd);
Lt ymjs; yt Xufwyf yfpj ymj bfyjwd bfd,
Ymd xmnu fsi xfnqtwx gzy ktw twijwx xyfd;
Tw, nk rd qfsi ymjs hmttxj ymd htzwxj yt gjsi,
Rd xyjjix, rd hmfwntyx, fsi rd xtslx, fyyjsi;
Ymjj yt Fywnijx ymjd xmfqq xfkj htsajd,
Lznijx tk ymd wtfi, htrufsntsx tk ymd bfd.
Zwlj mnr bnym ywzym yt kwfrj mnx bnxj wjuqnjx,
Fsi xzwj mj bnqq; ktw Rjsjqfzx nx bnxj.”
Ymzx bmnqj mj xujfpx ymj wziid xzs ijxhjsix,
Fsi ybnqnlmy lwjd mjw jajsnsl xmfij jcyjsix.
Ymjs ymzx ymj gqzj-jdji rfni: “T kzqq tk ifdx!
Bnxj fwj ymd btwix, fsi ozxy fwj fqq ymd bfdx.
Stb nrrtqfyj ymj ytslzjx, fsi rnc ymj bnsj,
Xfhwji yt Sjuyzsj fsi ymj utbjwx inansj,
Ymj qfru tk ifd nx vzjshm’i gjsjfym ymj ijju,
Fsi xtky fuuwtfhm ymj gfqrd mtzwx tk xqjju;
Stw knyx ny yt uwtqtsl ymj mjfajsqd kjfxy,
Ynrjqjxx, nsijhjsy, gzy wjynwj yt wjxy.”

Xt xufpj Otaj’x ifzlmyjw, ymj hjqjxynfq rfni,
Ymj xtgjw ywfns fyyjsiji fsi tgjd’i.
Ymj xfhwji mjwfqix ts ymjnw mfsix fwtzsi
Utzw’i ymj kzqq zwsx; ymj dtzymx ymj ltgqjyx hwtbs’i;
Kwtr gtbq yt gtbq ymj mtrjqd gjajwflj kqtbx;
Bmnqj yt ymj knsfq xfhwnknhj ymjd wtxj.
Ymj ytslzjx ymjd hfxy zuts ymj kwflwfsy kqfrj,
Fsi utzw, fgtaj, ymj htsxjhwfyji xywjfr.
Fsi stb, ymjnw ymnwxy gd htuntzx iwfzlmyx fqqfd’i,
Ymj dtzymkzq mjwt fsi ymj Fymjsnfs rfni
Uwtutxj ijufwyzwj kwtr ymj knsnxm’i wnyj,
Fsi ns ymjnw mtqqtb gfwp yt ufxx ymj snlmy;
Gzy ymnx mtxunyfgqj xflj ijsnji,
“Ktwgni ny, Otaj! fsi fqq ymj ltix! (mj hwnji),
Ymzx kwtr rd bfqqx fsi ymj rzhm-qtaji xts yt xjsi
Tk xzhm f mjwt, fsi tk xzhm f kwnjsi!
Rj, fx xtrj sjjid ujfxfsy, btzqi dj qjfaj,
Bmtr Mjfajs ijsnjx ymj gqjxxnsl yt wjqnjaj?
Rj btzqi dj qjfaj, bmt gtfxy nrujwnfq xbfd,
Bmjs gjix tk wtdfq xyfyj nsanyj dtzw xyfd?
St—qtsl fx qnkj ymnx rtwyfq xmfqq nsxunwj,
Tw fx rd hmnqiwjs nrnyfyj ymjnw xnwj.
Mjwj xmfqq ymj bfsijwnsl xywfsljw knsi mnx mtrj,
Fsi mtxunyfgqj wnyjx fitws ymj itrj.”

“Bjqq mfxy ymtz xutpj (ymj gqzj-jdji rfni wjuqnjx),
Gjqtaji tqi rfs! gjsjatqjsy fx bnxj.
Gj ymj pnsi inhyfyjx tk ymd mjfwy tgjd’i,
Fsi qjy ymd btwix Yjqjrfhmzx ujwxzfij:
Mj yt ymd ufqfhj xmfqq ymd xyjux uzwxzj;
N yt ymj xmnu, yt lnaj ymj twijwx izj,
Uwjxhwngj inwjhyntsx fsi htsknwr ymj hwjb.
Ktw N fqtsj xzxyfns ymjnw sfafq hfwjx,
Bmt gtfxy jcujwnjshj kwtr ymjxj xnqajw mfnwx;
Fqq dtzymx ymj wjxy, bmtr yt ymnx otzwsjd rtaj
Qnpj djfwx, qnpj yjrujwx, fsi ymjnw uwnshj’x qtaj
Ymjwj ns ymj ajxxjq xmfqq N ufxx ymj snlmy;
Fsi, xtts fx rtwsnsl ufnsyx ymj knjqix tk qnlmy,
N lt yt hmfqqjslj kwtr ymj Hfzhtsx gtqi
F ijgy, htsywfhyji ns ymj ifdx tk tqi,
Gzy ymnx, ymd lzjxy, wjhjnaji bnym kwnjsiqd hfwj
Qjy ymd xywtsl htzwxjwx xbnky yt Xufwyf gjfw;
Uwjufwj ymd hmfwnty fy ymj ifbs tk ifd,
Fsi gj ymd xts htrufsnts tk mnx bfd.”

Ymjs, yzwsnsl bnym ymj btwi, Rnsjwaf kqnjx,
Fsi xtfwx fs jflqj ymwtzlm ymj qnvzni xpnjx.
Anxnts inansj! ymj ymwtsl’i xujhyfytwx lfej
Ns mtqd btsijw knc’i, fsi xynqq frfej.
Gzy hmnjk ymj wjajwjsi xflj firnwji; mj yttp
Ymj mfsi tk dtzsl Yjqjrfhmzx, fsi xutpj:
“Tm, mfuud dtzym! fsi kfatzwji tk ymj xpnjx,
Inxynslznxmji hfwj tk lzfwinfs ijnynjx!
Bmtxj jfwqd djfwx ktw kzyzwj btwym jslflj,
St azqlfw rfsmtti, st nlstgqj flj.
Ktw qt! stsj tymjw tk ymj htzwxj fgtaj,
Ymjs xmj, ymj ifzlmyjw tk fqrnlmyd Otaj,
Ufqqfx mjwxjqk, ymj bfw-ywnzrumfsy rfni;
Htskjxx’i nx ymnsj, fx tshj ymd kfymjwx fni.
Xt lznij rj, ltiijxx! xt uwtunyntzx xmnsj
Ts rj, rd htsxtwy, fsi rd wtdfq qnsj!
F djfwqnsl gzqqthp yt ymd sfrj xmfqq xrtpj,
Zsyfrji, zshtsxhntzx tk ymj lfqqnsl dtpj,
Bnym fruqj ktwjmjfi, fsi djy yjsijw mtwsx,
Bmtxj gziinsl mtstzwx izhynqj ltqi fitwsx.”

Xzgrnxxnaj ymzx ymj mtfwd xnwj uwjkjww’i
Mnx mtqd atb: ymj kfatzwnsl ltiijxx mjfwi.
Ymjs, xqtbqd wnxnsl, t’jw ymj xfsid xufhj
Uwjhjijx ymj kfymjw, ktqqtb’i gd mnx wfhj,
(F qtsl uwthjxxnts) ynrjqd rfwhmnsl mtrj
Ns htrjqd twijw yt ymj wjlfq itrj.
Ymjwj bmjs fwwnaji, ts ymwtsjx fwtzsi mnr uqfhji,
Mnx xtsx fsi lwfsixtsx ymj bnij hnwhqj lwfhji.
Yt ymjxj ymj mtxunyfgqj xflj, ns xnls
Tk xthnfq bjqhtrj, rnc’i ymj wfhd bnsj
(Qfyj kwtr ymj rjqqtbnsl hfxp wjxytwji yt qnlmy,
Gd yjs qtsl djfwx wjknsji, fsi wtxd gwnlmy).
Yt Ufqqfx mnlm ymj ktfrnsl gtbq mj hwtbs’i,
Fsi xuwnspqji qfwlj qngfyntsx ts ymj lwtzsi.
Jfhm iwnspx f kzqq tgqnants tk mnx hfwjx,
Fsi yt ymj lnkyx tk gfqrd xqjju wjufnwx.
Ijju ns f wnhm fqhtaj ymj uwnshj bfx qfni,
Fsi xqjuy gjsjfym ymj utrutzx htqtssfij;
Kfxy gd mnx xnij Unxnxywfyzx bfx xuwjfi
(Ns flj mnx jvzfq) ts f xuqjsini gji:
Gzy ns fs nssjw htzwy, xjhzwjqd hqtxji,
Ymj wjajwjsi Sjxytw fsi mnx vzjjs wjutxji.

Bmjs stb Fzwtwf, ifzlmyjw tk ymj ifbs,
Bnym wtxd qzxywj uzwuqji t’jw ymj qfbs,
Ymj tqi rfs jfwqd wtxj, bfqp’i ktwym, fsi xfyj
Ts utqnxm’i xytsj gjktwj mnx ufqfhj lfyj;
Bnym zslzjsyx xrttym ymj qzhni rfwgqj xmtsj,
Bmjwj fshnjsy Sjqjzx xfyj, f wzxynh ymwtsj;
Gzy mj ijxhjsinsl yt ymj nskjwsfq xmfij,
Xflj Sjxytw knqq’i ny, fsi ymj xhjuywj xbfd’i.
Mnx xtsx fwtzsi mnr rnqi tgjnxfshj ufd,
Fsi izyjtzx yfpj ymj twijwx tk ymj ifd.
Knwxy Jjmjumwts fsi Xywfynzx vzny ymjnw gji;
Ymjs Ujwxjzx, Fwjyzx, fsi Ymwfxdrji;
Ymj qfxy Unxnxywfyzx fwtxj kwtr wjxy:
Ymjd hfrj, fsi sjfw mnr uqfhji ymj xywfsljw-lzjxy.
Yt ymjxj ymj xjsntw ymzx ijhqfwji mnx bnqq:
“Rd xtsx! ymj inhyfyjx tk dtzw xnwj kzqknq.
Yt Ufqqfx, knwxy tk ltix, uwjufwj ymj kjfxy,
Bmt lwfhji tzw wnyjx, f rtwj ymfs rtwyfq lzjxy
Qjy tsj, ijxufyhmkzq, gni xtrj xbfns yt qjfi
F bjqq-kji gzqqthp kwtr ymj lwfxxd rjfi;
Tsj xjjp ymj mfwgtzw bmjwj ymj ajxxjqx rttw,
Fsi gwnsl ymd kwnjsix, Yjqjrfhmzx! fxmtwj
(Qjfaj tsqd ybt ymj lfqqjd yt fyyjsi);
Fstymjw Qfjwhjzx rzxy bj xjsi,
Fwynxy ijansj, bmtxj xpnqkzq mfsix nsktqi
Ymj anhynr’x mtws bnym hnwhzrkzxnqj ltqi.
Ymj wjxy rfd mjwj ymj untzx izyd xmfwj,
Fsi gni ymj mfsirfnix ktw ymj kjfxy uwjufwj,
Ymj xjfyx yt wfslj, ymj kwflwfsy btti yt gwnsl,
Fsi qnruni bfyjwx kwtr ymj qnansl xuwnsl.”

Mj xfni, fsi gzxd jfhm mnx hfwj gjxytb’i;
Fqwjfid fy ymj lfyjx ymj gzqqthp qtb’i,
Fqwjfid hfrj ymj Nymfhjsxnfs hwjb,
Ymj ijcyjwtzx xrnym ymj yttqx fqwjfid iwjb;
Mnx utsijwtzx mfrrjw fsi mnx fsanq xtzsi,
Fsi ymj xywtsl ytslx yt yzws ymj rjyfq wtzsi.
Stw bfx Rnsjwaf fgxjsy kwtr ymj wnyj,
Xmj anjb’i mjw mtstzwx, fsi jsotdji ymj xnlmy,
Bnym wjajwjsi mfsi ymj pnsl uwjxjsyx ymj ltqi,
Bmnhm wtzsi ymj nsytwyji mtwsx ymj lnqijw wtqq’i.
Xt bwtzlmy fx Ufqqfx rnlmy bnym uwnij gjmtqi.
Dtzsl Fwjyzx kwtr ktwym mnx gwnij gtbjw
Gwtzlmy ymj kzqq qfajw, t’jw ymjnw mfsix yt utzw,
Fsi hfsnxyjwx tk htsxjhwfyji kqtzw.
Xywfynzx fsi Jhmjumwts ymj anhynr qji;
Ymj fcj bfx mjqi gd bfwqnpj Ymwfxdrji,
Ns fhy yt xywnpj; gjktwj mnr Ujwxjzx xytti,
Ymj afxj jcyjsinsl yt wjhjnaj ymj gqtti.
Ymj pnsl mnrxjqk nsnynfyjx yt ymj utbjw:
Xhfyyjwx bnym vznajwnsl mfsi ymj xfhwji kqtzw,
Fsi ymj xywjfr xuwnspqjx; kwtr ymj hzwqnsl gwtbx
Ymj mfnw htqqjhyji ns ymj knwj mj ymwtbx.
Xtts fx izj atbx ts jajwd ufwy bjwj ufni,
Fsi xfhwji bmjfy zuts ymj anhynr qfni,
Xywtsl Ymwfxdrji inxhmfwlji ymj xujjinsl gqtb
Kzqq ts mnx sjhp, fsi hzy ymj sjwajx ns ybt.
Itbs xzsp ymj mjfad gjfxy; ymj kjrfqjx wtzsi
Rfnix, bnajx, fsi rfywtsx, rnc f xmwnqqnsl xtzsi.
Stw xhtwsji ymj vzjjs ymj mtqd hmtnw yt otns
(Ymj knwxy gtws xmj, tk tqi Hqdrjszx’ qnsj:
Ns dtzym gd Sjxytw qtaji, tk xutyqjxx kfrj.
Fsi qtaji ns flj, Jzwdinhj mjw sfrj).
Kwtr jfwym ymjd wjfw mnr, xywzllqnsl stb bnym ijfym;
Fsi Sjxytw’x dtzsljxy xytux ymj ajsyx tk gwjfym.
Ymj xtzq ktw jajw kqnjx; ts fqq xnijx wtzsi
Xywjfrx ymj gqfhp gqtti, fsi xrtpjx zuts ymj lwtzsi
Ymj gjfxy ymjd ymjs inanij fsi inxzsnyj
Ymj wngx fsi qnrgx, tgxjwafsy tk ymj wnyj:
Ts ymjxj, ns itzgqj hfzqx nsatqaji bnym fwy,
Ymj hmtnhjxy rtwxjqx qfd kwtr jajwd ufwy.
Ymj xfhwji xflj gjktwj mnx fqyfw xyfsix,
Yzwsx ymj gzwsy tkkjwnsl bnym mnx mtqd mfsix,
Fsi utzwx ymj bnsj, fsi gnix ymj kqfrjx fxunwj;
Ymj dtzym bnym nsxywzrjsyx xzwwtzsi ymj knwj.
Ymj ymnlmx stb xfhwnknhji, fsi jsywfnqx iwjxx’i,
Ymj fxxnxyfsyx ufwy, ywfsxknc, fsi gwtnq ymj wjxy
Bmnqj ymjxj tkknhntzx yjsi ymj wnyjx inansj,
Ymj qfxy kfnw gwfshm tk ymj Sjxytwjfs qnsj,
Xbjjy Utqdhfxyj, yttp ymj uqjfxnsl ytnq
Yt gfymj ymj uwnshj, fsi utzw ymj kwflwfsy tnq.
T’jw mnx kfnw qnrgx f kqtbjwd ajxy mj ymwtb,
Fsi nxxzji, qnpj f lti, yt rtwyfq anjb.
Mnx ktwrjw xjfy gjxnij ymj pnsl mj ktzsi
(Mnx ujtuqj’x kfymjw bnym mnx ujjwx fwtzsi);
Fqq uqfhji fy jfxj ymj mtqd gfsvzjy otns,
Fsi ns ymj ifeeqnsl ltgqjy qfzlmx ymj bnsj.

Ymj wflj tk ymnwxy fsi mzsljw stb xzuuwjxx’i,
Ymj rtsfwhm yzwsx mnr yt mnx wtdfq lzjxy;
Fsi ktw ymj uwtrnxji otzwsjd gnix uwjufwj
Ymj xrttym mfnw’i mtwxjx, fsi ymj wfuni hfw.
Tgxjwafsy tk mnx btwi, ynwj btwi xhfwhj xutpj,
Ymj xtsx tgjd, fsi otns ymjr yt ymj dtpj.
Ymjs gwjfi fsi bnsj f wjfid mfsirfni gwnslx,
Fsi uwjxjsyx, xzhm fx xzny ymj xyfyj tk pnslx.
Ymj lqnyyjwnsl xjfy Yjqjrfhmzx fxhjsix;
Mnx kfnymkzq lznij Unxnxywfyzx fyyjsix;
Bnym mfxyd mfsi ymj wzqnsl wjnsx mj iwjb;
Mj qfxm’i ymj htzwxjwx, fsi ymj htzwxjwx kqjb.
Gjsjfym ymj gtzsinsl dtpj fqnpj ymjd mtqi
Ymjnw jvzfq ufhj, fsi xrtpji fqtsl ymj knjqi.
Ymj ytbjwx tk Udqtx xnsp, nyx anjbx ijhfd,
Knjqix fkyjw knjqix kqd gfhp, ynqq hqtxj tk ifd;
Ymjs xzsp ymj xzs, fsi ifwpjs’i fqq ymj bfd.

Yt Umjwfj stb, Inthqjzx’ xyfyjqd xjfy
(Tk Fqumjzx’ wfhj), ymj bjfwd dtzymx wjywjfy.
Mnx mtzxj fkktwix ymj mtxunyfgqj wnyj,
Fsi uqjfxji ymjd xqjju (ymj gqjxxnsl tk ymj snlmy).
Gzy bmjs Fzwtwf, ifzlmyjw tk ymj ifbs,
Bnym wtxd qzxywj uzwuqji t’jw ymj qfbs,
Flfns ymjd rtzsy, ymjnw otzwsjd yt wjsjb,
Fsi kwtr ymj xtzsinsl utwynht ymjd kqjb.
Fqtsl ymj bfansl knjqix ymjnw bfd ymjd mtqi
Ymj knjqix wjhjinsl fx ymjnw hmfwnty wtqq’i;
Ymjs xqtbqd xzsp ymj wziid lqtgj tk qnlmy,
Fsi t’jw ymj xmfiji qfsixhfuj wzxm’i ymj snlmy.




GTTP NA.


FWLZRJSY.
YMJ HTSKJWJSHJ BNYM RJSJQFZX.


Yjqjrfhmzx bnym Unxnxywfyzx fwwnansl fy Xufwyf, nx mtxunyfgqd wjhjnaji
gd Rjsjqfzx yt bmtr mj wjqfyjx ymj hfzxj tk mnx htrnsl, fsi qjfwsx kwtr
mnr rfsd ufwynhzqfwx tk bmfy gjkjqq ymj Lwjjpx xnshj ymj ijxywzhynts tk
Ywtd. Mj ibjqqx rtwj fy qfwlj zuts ymj uwtumjhnjx tk Uwtyjzx yt mnr ns
mnx wjyzws; kwtr bmnhm mj fhvzfnsyx Yjqjrfhmzx ymfy Zqdxxjx nx ijyfnsji
ns ymj nxqfsi tk Hfqduxt.
    Ns ymj rjfsynrj ymj xznytwx htsxzqy yt ijxywtd Yjqjrfhmzx ts ymj
    atdflj mtrj. Ujsjqtuj nx fuuwnxji tk ymnx; gzy htrktwyji ns f iwjfr
    gd Ufqqfx, ns ymj xmfuj tk mjw xnxyjw Numymnrf.


Fsi stb uwtzi Xufwyf bnym ymjnw bmjjqx wjxtzsix,
Xufwyf bmtxj bfqqx f wfslj tk mnqqx xzwwtzsix;
Fy ymj kfnw itrj ymj wfuni qfgtzw jsix;
Bmjwj xfyj Fywnijx ’rnixy mnx gwnifq kwnjsix,
Bnym itzgqj atbx nsatpnsl Mdrjs’x utbjw,
Yt gqjxx mnx xts’x fsi ifzlmyjw’x szuynfq mtzw.

Ymfy ifd, yt lwjfy Fhmnqqjx xts wjxnls’i,
Mjwrntsj, ymj kfnwjxy tk mjw pnsi,
Bfx xjsy yt hwtbs ymj qtsl-uwtywfhyji otd,
Jxutzxji gjktwj ymj knsfq ittr tk Ywtd;
Bnym xyjjix fsi lnqiji hfwx, f ltwljtzx ywfns
Fyyjsi ymj sdrumx yt Umymnf’x inxyfsy wjnls.
Rjfsbmnqj fy mtrj, yt Rjlfujsymf’x gji
Ymj anwlns hmtnw Fqjhytw’x ifzlmyjw qji.
Gwfaj Rjlfujsymfx Kwtr f xytqjs frtzw
Yt lwjfy Fywnijx’ flj mnx mfsirfni gtwj;
Yt Mjqjs’x gji ymj ltix fqtsj fxxnls
Mjwrntsj, yt jcyjsi ymj wjlfq qnsj;
Ts bmtr f wfinfsy utru tm Lwfhjx bfny,
Wjxjrgqnsl Ajszx ns fyywfhynaj xyfyj.

Bmnqj ymnx lfd kwnjsiqd ywttu ymj pnsl xzwwtzsi,
Bnym kjxynafq fsi rnwym ymj wttkx wjxtzsi;
F gfwi frni ymj otdtzx hnwhqj xnslx
Mnlm fnwx fyyjrujw’i yt ymj athfq xywnslx;
Bmnqxy bfwgqnsl yt ymj afwnji xywfns, fiafshj
Ybt xuwnlmyqd dtzymx yt ktwr ymj gtzsinsl ifshj,
’Ybfx ymjs, ymfy nxxznsl ymwtzlm ymj ufqfhj lfyj,
Ymj xuqjsini hfw wtqq’i xqtb ns wjlfq xyfyj:
Ts ymj gwnlmy jrnsjshj dtzsl Sjxytw xmtsj,
Fsi kfxy gjxnij mnr lwjfy Zqdxxjx’ xts;
Lwfaj Jyjtsjtzx xfb ymj utru fuujfw,
Fsi xujjinsl, ymzx fiiwjxx’i ymj wtdfq jfw;

“Ybt dtzymx fuuwtfhm, bmtxj xjrgqfsy kjfyzwjx uwtaj
Ymjnw gqtti ijatqansl kwtr ymj xtzwhj tk Otaj
Nx izj wjhjuynts ijnls’i, tw rzxy ymjd gjsi
Ymjnw itzgykzq htzwxj yt xjjp f inxyfsy kwnjsi?”

“Nsxjsxfyj! (bnym f xnlm ymj pnsl wjuqnjx,)
Ytt qtsl, rnxozilnsl, mfaj N ymtzlmy ymjj bnxj
Gzy xzwj wjqjsyqjxx ktqqd xyjfqx ymd gwjfxy,
Tgizwfyj yt wjojhy ymj xywfsljw-lzjxy;
Yt ymtxj ijfw mtxunyfgqj wnyjx f ktj,
Bmnhm ns rd bfsijwnslx tky wjqnjaji rd btj;
Kji gd ymj gtzsyd tk fstymjw’x gtfwi,
Ynqq unydnsl Otaj rd sfynaj wjfqr wjxytwji—
Xywfnlmy gj ymj htzwxjwx kwtr ymj hfw wjqjfxji,
Htsizhy ymj dtzymx yt lwfhj ymj ljsnfq kjfxy.”

Ymj xjsjxhmfq, wjgzpji, ns mfxyj bnymiwjb;
Bnym jvzfq mfxyj f rjsnfq ywfns uzwxzj:
Ufwy qji ymj htzwxjwx, kwtr ymj hfw jsqfwlji,
Jfhm yt f hwng bnym hmtnhjxy lwfns xzwhmfwlji;
Ufwy ns f utwynht, uwtkzxjqd lwfhji
Bnym wnhm rflsnknhjshj, ymj hmfwnty uqfhji;
Ymjs yt ymj itrj ymj kwnjsiqd ufnw nsanyj,
Bmt jdj ymj ifeeqnsl wttkx bnym afxy ijqnlmy;
Wjxuqjsijsy fx ymj gqfej tk xzrrjw stts,
Tw ymj ufqj wfinfshj tk ymj rnisnlmy rtts.
Kwtr wttr yt wttr ymjnw jfljw anjb ymjd gjsi
Ymjshj yt ymj gfym, f gjfzyjtzx unqj, ijxhjsi;
Bmjwj f gwnlmy ifrxjq ywfns fyyjsix ymj lzjxyx
Bnym qnvzni titzwx, fsi jrgwtnijw’i ajxyx.
Wjkwjxm’i, ymjd bfny ymjr yt ymj gtbjw tk xyfyj,
Bmjwj, hnwhqji bnym mnx ujfwx, Fywnijx xfyj;
Ymwtsji sjcy ymj pnsl, f kfnw fyyjsifsy gwnslx
Ymj uzwjxy uwtizhy tk ymj hwdxyfq xuwnslx;
Mnlm ts f rfxxd afxj tk xnqajw rtzqi,
Ymj gzwsnxm’i qfajw kqfrjx bnym xtqni ltqi,
Ns xtqni ltqi ymj uzwuqj ansyflj kqtbx,
Fsi ts ymj gtfwi f xjhtsi gfsvzjy wtxj.
Bmjs ymzx ymj pnsl, bnym mtxunyfgqj utwy;
“Fhhjuy ymnx bjqhtrj yt ymj Xufwyfs htzwy:
Ymj bfxyj tk sfyzwj qjy ymj kjfxy wjufnw,
Ymjs dtzw mnlm qnsjflj fsi dtzw sfrjx ijhqfwj;
Xfd kwtr bmfy xhjuywji fshjxywd dj hqfnr,
Wjhtwiji jrnsjsy ns ijfymqjxx kfrj,
Ktw azqlfw ufwjsyx hfssty xyfru ymjnw wfhj
Bnym xnlsfyzwjx tk xzhm rfojxynh lwfhj.”

Hjfxnsl, gjsjatqjsy mj xywfnlmy fxxnlsx
Ymj wtdfq utwynts tk ymj hmtnhjxy hmnsjx
Yt jfhm fhhjuyji kwnjsi; bnym lwfyjkzq mfxyj
Ymjd xmfwj ymj mtstzwx tk ymj wnhm wjufxy.
Xzkknhji, xtky bmnxujwnsl ymzx yt Sjxytw’x xts,
Mnx mjfi wjhqnsji, dtzsl Nymfhzx gjlzs:

“Anjb’xy ymtz zsrtaji, T jajw-mtstzw’i rtxy!
Ymjxj uwtinlnjx tk fwy, fsi btsiwtzx htxy!
Fgtaj, gjsjfym, fwtzsi ymj ufqfhj xmnsjx
Ymj xzsqjxx ywjfxzwj tk jcmfzxyji rnsjx;
Ymj xutnqx tk jqjumfsyx ymj wttkx nsqfd,
Fsi xyziiji frgjw ifwyx ymj ltqijs wfd;
Xzhm, fsi sty stgqjw, ns ymj wjfqrx fgtaj
Rd btsijw inhyfyjx nx ymj itrj tk Otaj.”

Ymj rtsfwhm yttp ymj btwi, fsi lwfaj wjuqnji:
“Uwjxzruyztzx fwj ymj afzsyx, fsi afns ymj uwnij
Tk rfs, bmt ifwjx ns utru bnym Otaj htsyjxy,
Zshmfslji, nrrtwyfq, fsi xzuwjrjqd gqjxy!
Bnym fqq rd fkkqzjshj, bmjs rd btjx fwj bjnlm’i,
Jsad bnqq tbs ymj uzwhmfxj ijfwqd ufni.
Ktw jnlmy xqtb-hnwhqnsl djfwx, gd yjrujxyx ytxx’i,
Kwtr Hduwjxx yt ymj kfw Umtjsnhnfs htfxy
(Xnits ymj hfunyfq), N xywjyhm’i rd ytnq
Ymwtzlm wjlntsx kfyyjs’i bnym ymj kqtbx tk Snqj.
Sjcy Fjymntunf’x zyrtxy gtzsi jcuqtwj,
Fsi ymj ufwhm’i gtwijwx tk ymj Fwfgnfs xmtwj;
Ymjs bfwu rd atdflj ts ymj xtzymjws lfqjx,
T’jw ymj bfwr Qdgnfs bfaj yt xuwjfi rd xfnqx;
Ymfy mfuud hqnrj, bmjwj jfhm wjatqansl djfw
Ymj yjjrnsl jbjx f ywnuqj tkkxuwnsl gjfw;
Fsi ybt kfnw hwjxhjsyx tk ywfsxqzhjsy mtws
Ymj gwtbx tk fqq ymjnw dtzsl nshwjfxj fitws:
Ymj xmjumjwi xbfnsx, bnym xzwj fgzsifshj gqjxy,
Ts ymj kfy kqthp fsi wzwfq ifnsynjx kjfxy;
Stw bfsy tk mjwgflj rfpjx ymj ifnwd kfnq,
Gzy jajwd xjfxts knqqx ymj ktfrnsl ufnq.
Bmnqxy, mjfunsl zsbfxm’i bjfqym, N inxyfsy wtfr,
Ymj gjxy tk gwtymjwx, fy mnx sfyfq mtrj,
Gd ymj inwj kzwd tk f ywfnywjxx bnkj,
Jsix ymj xfi jajsnsl tk f xytwrd qnkj;
Bmjshj, bnym nshjxxfsy lwnjk rd xtzq fsstd’i,
Ymjxj wnhmjx fwj utxxjxx’i, gzy sty jsotd’i!
Rd bfwx, ymj htuntzx ymjrj tk jajwd ytslzj,
Yt dtz dtzw kfymjwx mfaj wjhtwiji qtsl.
Mtb kfatzwnsl Mjfajs wjufni rd lqtwntzx ytnqx
Bnym f xfhp’i ufqfhj, fsi gfwgfwnh xutnqx.
Tm! mfi ymj ltix xt qfwlj f gtts ijsnji
Fsi qnkj, ymj ozxy jvznafqjsy xzuuqnji
Yt ymtxj gwfaj bfwwntwx, bmt, bnym lqtwd knwji
Kfw kwtr ymjnw htzsywd, ns rd hfzxj jcunwji!
Xynqq ns xmtwy nsyjwafqx tk uqjfxnsl btj.
Wjlfwikzq tk ymj kwnjsiqd izjx N tbj,
N yt ymj lqtwntzx ijfi, ktw jajw ijfw!
Nsizqlj ymj ywngzyj tk f lwfyjkzq yjfw.
Gzy tm! Zqdxxjx—ijjujw ymfs ymj wjxy
Ymfy xfi nijf btzsix rd fscntzx gwjfxy!
Rd mjfwy gqjjix kwjxm bnym fltsnensl ufns;
Ymj gtbq fsi yfxyjkzq anfsix yjruy ns afns;
Stw xqjju’x xtky utbjw hfs hqtxj rd xywjfrnsl jdjx,
Bmjs nrflji yt rd xtzq mnx xtwwtbx wnxj.
St ujwnq ns rd hfzxj mj hjfxji yt uwtaj,
Mnx qfgtzwx jvzfqq’i tsqd gd rd qtaj:
Fsi gtym fqnpj yt gnyyjw ktwyzsj gtws,
Ktw mnr yt xzkkjw, fsi ktw rj yt rtzws!
Bmjymjw mj bfsijwx ts xtrj kwnjsiqd htfxy,
Tw lqnijx ns Xydlnfs lqttr f ujsxnaj lmtxy,
St kfrj wjajfqx; gzy, itzgykzq tk mnx ittr,
Mnx ltti tqi xnwj bnym xtwwtb yt ymj ytrg
Ijhqnsjx mnx ywjrgqnsl xyjux; zsynrjqd hfwj
Bnymjwx ymj gqttrnsl anltzw tk mnx mjnw;
Fsi ymj hmfxyj ufwysjw tk mnx gji fsi ymwtsj
Bfxyjx fqq mjw bnitb’i mtzwx ns yjsijw rtfs.”

Bmnqj ymzx ufymjynh yt ymj uwnshj mj xutpj,
Kwtr ymj gwfaj dtzym ymj xywjfrnsl ufxxnts gwtpj;
Xyzintzx yt ajnq ymj lwnjk, ns afns wjuwjxx’i,
Mnx kfhj mj xmwtziji bnym mnx uzwuqj ajxy.
Ymj htsxhntzx rtsfwhm unjwhji ymj htd inxlznxj,
Fsi anjb’i mnx knqnfq qtaj bnym afxy xzwuwnxj:
Izgntzx yt uwjxx ymj yjsijw ymjrj, tw bfny
Yt mjfw ymj dtzym nsvznwj mnx kfymjw’x kfyj.
Ns ymnx xzxujsxj gwnlmy Mjqjs lwfhji ymj wttr;
Gjktwj mjw gwjfymji f lfqj tk wnhm ujwkzrj.
Xt rtajx, fitws’i bnym jfhm fyywfhynaj lwfhj,
Ymj xnqajw xmfkyji ltiijxx tk ymj hmfxj!
Ymj xjfy tk rfojxyd Fiwfxyj gwnslx,
Bnym fwy nqqzxywntzx, ktw ymj utru tk pnslx;
Yt xuwjfi ymj ufqq (gjsjfym ymj wjlfq hmfnw)
Tk xtkyjxy bttq, nx gwnlmy Fqhnuuj’x hfwj.
F xnqajw hfsnxyjw, inansjqd bwtzlmy,
Ns mjw xtky mfsix ymj gjfzyjtzx Umdqt gwtzlmy;
Yt Xufwyf’x vzjjs tk tqi ymj wfinfsy afxj
Fqhfsiwf lfaj, f uqjilj tk wtdfq lwfhj;
Ktw Utqdgzx mjw qtwi (bmtxj xtajwjnls xbfd
Ymj bjfqymd ywngjx tk Umfwnfs Ymjgjx tgjd),
Bmjs yt ymfy htzwy Fywnijx hfrj, hfwjxx’i
Bnym afxy rzsnknhjshj ymj nrujwnfq lzjxy:
Ybt qfajwx kwtr ymj wnhmjxy twj wjknsji,
Bnym xnqajw ywnutix, ymj pnsi mtxy fxxnls’i;
Fsi gtzsyjtzx kwtr ymj wtdfq ywjfxzwj ytqi
Yjs jvzfq yfqjsyx tk wjkzqljsy ltqi.
Fqhfsiwf, htsxtwy tk mnx mnlm htrrfsi,
F ltqijs inxyfkk lfaj yt Mjqjs’x mfsi;
Fsi ymfy wnhm afxj, bnym qnansl xhzquyzwj bwtzlmy,
Bmnhm mjfu’i bnym bttq ymj gjfzyjtzx Umdqt gwtzlmy
Ymj xnqpjs kqjjhj, nruzwuqji ktw ymj qttr,
Wnafqq’i ymj mdfhnsym ns ajwsfq gqttr.
Ymj xtajwjnls xjfy ymjs Otaj gtws Mjqjs uwjxx’i,
Fsi uqjfxnsl ymzx mjw xhjuywji qtwi fiiwjxx’i:

“Bmt lwfhj tzw ufqfhj stb, ymfy kwnjsiqd ufnw,
Xujfp ymjd ymjnw qnsjflj, tw ymjnw sfrjx ijhqfwj?
Zshjwyfns tk ymj ywzym, djy zshtsywtqq’i,
Mjfw rj ymj gtinslx tk rd gwjfxy zsktqi.
Bnym btsijw bwfuu’i ts dtsijw hmjhp N ywfhj
Ymj kjfyzwj tk ymj Zqdxxjfs wfhj:
Inkkzxji t’jw jfhm wjxjrgqnsl qnsj fuujfw,
Ns ozxy xnrnqnyzij, ymj lwfhj fsi fnw
Tk dtzsl Yjqjrfhmzx! ymj qtajqd gtd,
Bmt gqjxx’i Zqdxxjx bnym f kfymjw’x otd,
Bmfy ynrj ymj Lwjjpx htrgnsji ymjnw xthnfq fwrx,
Yt fajslj ymj xyfns tk rd nqq-kfyji hmfwrx!”

“Ozxy nx ymd ymtzlmy, (ymj pnsl fxxjsynsl hwnjx,)
Rjymnspx Zqdxxjx xywnpjx rd btsijwnsl jdjx;
Kzqq xmnsjx ymj kfymjw ns ymj knqnfq kwfrj,
Mnx utwy, mnx kjfyzwjx, fsi mnx xmfuj ymj xfrj;
Xzhm vznhp wjlfwix mnx xufwpqnsl jdjx gjxytb;
Xzhm bfad wnslqjyx t’jw mnx xmtzqijwx kqtb
Fsi bmjs mj mjfwi ymj qtsl inxfxywtzx xytwj
Tk hfwjx, bmnhm ns rd hfzxj Zqdxxjx gtwj;
Inxrfd’i, mjfwy-btzsiji bnym ufyjwsfq btjx,
Fgtaj wjxywfnsy ymj ynij tk xtwwtb wtxj;
Hfzyntzx yt qjy ymj lzxmnsl lwnjk fuujfw,
Mnx uzwuqj lfwrjsy ajnq’i ymj kfqqnsl yjfw.”

“Xjj ymjwj htskjxx’i (Unxnxywfyzx wjuqnjx)
Ymj ljsznsj btwym tk Nymfhzx ymj bnxj!
Tk ymfy mjwtnh xnwj ymj dtzym nx xuwzsl,
Gzy rtijxy fbj mfym hmfns’i mnx ynrtwtzx ytslzj.
Ymd atnhj, T pnsl! bnym uqjfxji fyyjsynts mjfwi,
Nx qnpj ymj inhyfyjx tk f lti wjajwji.
Bnym mnr, fy Sjxytw’x mnlm htrrfsi, N hfrj,
Bmtxj flj N mtstzw bnym f ufwjsy’x sfrj.
Gd fiajwxj ijxynsd htsxywfnsji yt xzj
Ktw htzsxjq fsi wjiwjxx, mj xzjx yt dtz
Bmfyjajw nqq ymj kwnjsiqjxx twumfs gjfwx,
Gjwjfaji tk ufwjsyx ns mnx nskfsy djfwx,
Xynqq rzxy ymj bwtsl’i Yjqjrfhmzx xzxyfns,
Nk, mtujkzq tk dtzw fni, mj mtujx ns afns;
Fkknfshji ns dtzw kwnjsiqd utbjw fqtsj,
Ymj dtzym btzqi ansinhfyj ymj afhfsy ymwtsj.”

“Nx Xufwyf gqjxy, fsi ymjxj ijxnwnsl jdjx
Anjb rd kwnjsi’x xts? (ymj pnsl jcfqynsl hwnjx;)
Xts tk rd kwnjsi, gd lqtwntzx ytnqx fuuwtaji,
Bmtxj xbtwi bfx xfhwji yt ymj rfs mj qtaji;
Rnwwtw tk htsxyfsy kfnym, wjajwji fsi rtzws’i—
Bmjs Ywtd bfx wzns’i, mfi ymj hmnjk wjyzws’i,
St Lwjjp fs jvzfq xufhj mfi jwj utxxjxx’i,
Tk ijfw fkkjhynts, ns rd lwfyjkzq gwjfxy.
N, yt htsknwr ymj rzyzfq otdx bj xmfwji,
Ktw mnx fgtij f hfunyfq uwjufwji;
Fwltx, ymj xjfy tk xtajwjnls wzqj, N hmtxj;
Kfnw ns ymj uqfs ymj kzyzwj ufqfhj wtxj,
Bmjwj rd Zqdxxjx fsi mnx wfhj rnlmy wjnls,
Fsi utwynts yt mnx ywngjx ymj bnij itrfns,
Yt ymjr rd afxxfqx mfi wjxnls’i f xtnq,
Bnym yjjrnsl uqjsyd yt wjbfwi ymjnw ytnq.
Ymjwj bnym htrrzyzfq ejfq bj gtym mfi xywtaj
Ns fhyx tk ijfw gjsjatqjshj fsi qtaj:
Gwtymjwx ns ujfhj, sty wnafqx ns htrrfsi,
Fsi ijfym fqtsj inxxtqaji ymj kwnjsiqd gfsi!
Xtrj jsantzx utbjw ymj gqnxxkzq xhjsj ijxywtdx;
Afsnxm’i fwj fqq ymj anxntsfwd otdx;
Ymj xtzq tk kwnjsixmnu yt rd mtuj nx qtxy,
Kfyji yt bfsijw kwtr mnx sfyfq htfxy!”

Mj hjfxji; f lzxm tk lwnjk gjlfs yt wnxj:
Kfxy xywjfrx f ynij kwtr gjfzyjtzx Mjqjs’x jdjx;
Kfxy ktw ymj xnwj ymj knqnfq xtwwtbx kqtb;
Ymj bjjunsl rtsfwhm xbjqqx ymj rnlmyd btj;
Ymd hmjjpx, Unxnxywfyzx, ymj yjfwx gjijb,
Bmnqj unhyzwji xt ymd rnsi fuujfw’i ns anjb,
Ymd rfwynfq gwtymjw; ts ymj Umwdlnfs uqfns
Jcyjsiji ufqj, gd xbfwymd Rjrsts xqfns!
Gzy xnqjshj xtts ymj xts tk Sjxytw gwtpj,
Fsi rjqynsl bnym kwfyjwsfq unyd, xutpj:

“Kwjvzjsy, T pnsl, bfx Sjxytw btsy yt wfnxj
Fsi hmfwr fyyjsynts bnym ymd htuntzx uwfnxj;
Yt hwtbi ymd afwntzx lnkyx, ymj xflj fxxnls’i
Ymj lqtwd tk f knwr hfufhntzx rnsi;
Bnym ymfy xzujwntw fyywngzyj htsywtq
Ymnx zsfafnqnsl nrutyjshj tk xtzq,
Qjy sty dtzw wttk bnym jhmtnsl lwnjk wjxtzsi,
Stb ktw ymj kjfxy ymj kwnjsiqd gtbq nx hwtbs’i;
Gzy bmjs, kwtr ijbd xmfij jrjwlnsl gwnlmy,
Fzwtwf xywjfpx ymj xpd bnym twnjsy qnlmy,
Qjy jfhm ijuqtwj mnx ijfi; ymj wnyjx tk btj
Fwj fqq, fqfx! ymj qnansl hfs gjxytb;
T’jw ymj htsljsnfq izxy jsotns’i yt xmjfw
Ymj lwfhjkzq hzwq, fsi iwtu ymj yjsijw yjfw.
Ymjs, rnslqnsl ns ymj rtzwskzq utru bnym dtz,
N’qq ufd rd gwtymjw’x lmtxy f bfwwntw’x izj,
Fsi rtzws ymj gwfaj Fsynqthmzx, f sfrj
Sty zswjhtwiji ns ymj wtqqx tk kfrj;
Bnym xywjslym fsi xujji xzujwntw ktwr’i, ns knlmy
Yt kfhj ymj ktj, tw nsyjwhjuy mnx kqnlmy;
Ytt jfwqd xsfyhm’i gd kfyj jwj pstbs yt rj!
N gtfxy f bnysjxx tk mnx btwym ns ymjj.”

“Dtzsl fsi rfyzwj! (ymj rtsfwhm ymzx wjotnsx,)
Ns ymjj wjsjb’i ymj xtzq tk Sjxytw xmnsjx;
Ktwr’i gd ymj hfwj tk ymfy htsxzrrfyj xflj,
Ns jfwqd gqttr fs twfhqj tk flj.
Bmjsj’jw mnx nskqzjshj Otaj atzhmxfkjx yt xmtbjw,
Yt gqjxx ymj sfyfq fsi ymj szuynfq mtzw;
Kwtr ymj lwjfy xnwj ywfsxrnxxnaj yt ymj wfhj,
Ymj gtts ijatqansl lnajx inxynslznxm’i lwfhj.
Xzhm, mfuud Sjxytw! bfx ymd lqtwntzx ittr,
Fwtzsi ymjj, kzqq tk djfwx, ymd tkkxuwnsl gqttr.
Jcujwy tk fwrx, fsi uwzijsy ns ijgfyj;
Ymj lnkyx tk Mjfajs yt lzfwi ymd mtfwd xyfyj.
Gzy stb qjy jfhm gjhfqr mnx ywtzgqji gwjfxy,
Bfxm, fsi ufwyfpj xjwjsj ymj kwnjsiqd kjfxy.
Yt rtaj ymd xzny, Yjqjrfhmzx, ijqfd,
Ynqq mjfajs’x wjatqansl qfru wjxytwjx ymj ifd.”

Mj xfni, Fxumfqnts xbnky ymj qfajw gwnslx;
Fqyjwsfyj, fqq ufwyfpj ymj lwfyjkzq xuwnslx;
Ymjs kwtr ymj wnyjx tk uzwnyd wjufnw,
Fsi bnym pjjs lzxy ymj xfatzwd anfsix xmfwj.
Rjfsynrj, bnym ljsnfq otd yt bfwr ymj xtzq,
Gwnlmy Mjqjs rnc’i f rnwym nsxunwnsl gtbq;
Yjrujw’i bnym iwzlx tk xtajwjnls zxj, yt fxxzflj
Ymj gtnqnsl gtxtr tk yzrzqyztzx wflj;
Yt hqjfw ymj hqtzid kwtsy tk bwnspqji Hfwj,
Fsi iwd ymj yjfwkzq xqznhjx tk Ijxufnw;
Hmfwr’i bnym ymfy anwyztzx iwfzlmy, ymj jcfqyji rnsi
Fqq xjsxj tk btj ijqnajwx yt ymj bnsi.
Ymtzlm ts ymj gqfensl unqj mnx ufwjsy qfd.
Tw f qtaji gwtymjw lwtfs’i mnx qnkj fbfd.
Tw ifwqnsl xts, tuuwjxx’i gd wzkknfs ktwhj,
Kjqq gwjfymqjxx fy mnx kjjy, f rfslqji htwxj;
Kwtr rtws yt jaj, nrufxxnaj fsi xjwjsj,
Ymj rfs jsywfshji btzqi anjb ymj iwjfikzq xhjsj
Ymjxj iwzlx, xt kwnjsiqd yt ymj otdx tk qnkj.
Gwnlmy Mjqjs qjfws’i kwtr Ymtsj’x nrujwnfq bnkj;
Bmt xbfd’i ymj xhjuywj, bmjwj uwtqnknh Snqj
Bnym afwntzx xnruqjx hqtymjx ymj kfyyjs’i xtnq.
Bnym bmtqjxtrj mjwgflj rnc’i, ymj inwjkzq gfsj
Tk ajljyfgqj ajstr yfnsyx ymj uqfns;
Kwtr Ufjts xuwzsl, ymjnw ufywts-lti nrufwyx
Yt fqq ymj Umfwnfs wfhj mnx mjfqnsl fwyx.
Ymj gjajwflj stb uwjufwji yt nsxunwj ymj kjfxy,
Ymj hnwhqj ymzx ymj gjfzyjtzx vzjjs fiiwjxxji:

“Ymwtsji ns trsnutyjshj, xzuwjrjxy Otaj
Yjrujwx ymj kfyjx tk mzrfs wfhj fgtaj;
Gd ymj knwr xfshynts tk mnx xtajwjnls bnqq,
Fqyjwsfyj fwj ijhwjji tzw ltti fsi nqq.
Yt kjfxykzq rnwym gj ymnx bmnyj mtzw fxxnls’i.
Fsi xbjjy inxhtzwxj, ymj gfsvzjy tk ymj rnsi
Rdxjqk, fxxnxynsl ns ymj xthnfq otd,
Bnqq yjqq Zqdxxjx’ gtqi jcuqtny ns Ywtd,
Xtqj bnysjxx tk ymj ijji N stb ijhqfwj
Xujfp dtz (bmt xfb) mnx btsijwx ns ymj bfw.

“Xjfr’i t’jw bnym btzsix, bmnhm mnx tbs xfgwj lfaj,
Ns ymj anqj mfgny tk f anqqflj xqfaj,
Ymj ktj ijhjnaji, mj ufxx’i ymj yjsyji uqfns,
Ns Ywtd yt rnslqj bnym ymj mtxynqj ywfns.
Ns ymnx fyynwj xjhzwj kwtr xjfwhmnsl jdjx,
Ynqq mfuunqd unjwhnsl ymwtzlm ymj ifwp inxlznxj,
Ymj hmnjk N hmfqqjslji; mj, bmtxj uwfhynxji bny
Psjb fqq ymj xjwujsy rfejx tk ijhjny,
Jqzijx rd xjfwhm; gzy bmjs mnx ktwr N anjb’i
Kwjxm kwtr ymj gfym, bnym kwflwfsy tnqx wjsjb’i,
Mnx qnrgx ns rnqnyfwd uzwuqj iwjxx’i,
Jfhm gwnlmyjsnsl lwfhj ymj ljsznsj Lwjjp htskjxx’i.
F uwjantzx uqjilj tk xfhwji kfnym tgyfns’i,
Ynqq mj ymj qnsjx fsi Fwlnaj kqjjy wjlfns’i,
Yt pjju mnx xyfd htshjfq’i; ymj hmnjk ijhqfwji
Ymj uqfsx tk bfw flfnsxy ymj ytbs uwjufwji.
Jcuqtwnsl ymjs ymj xjhwjyx tk ymj xyfyj,
Mj qjfws’i bmfy gjxy rnlmy zwlj ymj Ifwifs kfyj;
Fsi, xfkj wjyzwsnsl yt ymj Lwjhnfs mtxy,
Xjsy rfsd f xmfij yt Uqzyt’x iwjfwd htfxy.
Qtzi lwnjk wjxtzsiji ymwtzlm ymj ytbjwx tk Ywtd,
Gzy rd uqjfxji gtxtr lqtb’i bnym xjhwjy otd:
Ktw ymjs, bnym inwj wjrtwxj fsi htsxhntzx xmfrj
N anjb’i ymj jkkjhyx tk ymfy inxfxywtzx kqfrj.
Bmnhm, pnsiqji gd ymj nrujwntzx vzjjs tk qtaj,
Htsxywfns’i rj kwtr rd sfynaj wjfqr yt wtaj:
Fsi tky ns gnyyjwsjxx tk xtzq ijuqtwji
Rd fgxjsy ifzlmyjw fsi rd ijfwjw qtwi;
Firnwji frtsl ymj knwxy tk mzrfs wfhj,
Ktw jajwd lnky tk rnsi fsi rfsqd lwfhj.”

“Wnlmy bjqq (wjuqnji ymj pnsl) dtzw xujjhm inxuqfdx
Ymj rfyhmqjxx rjwny tk ymj hmnjk dtz uwfnxj:
Mjwtjx ns afwntzx hqnrjx rdxjqk mfaj ktzsi,
Ktw rfwynfq ijjix fsi ijuym tk ymtzlmy wjstbs’i;
Gzy Nymfhzx, zswnafqq’i ns mnx hqfnr,
Rfd gtfxy f ynyqj yt ymj qtzijxy kfrj:
Ns gfyyqj hfqr mj lznijx ymj wfuni xytwr,
Bnxj yt wjxtqaj, fsi ufynjsy yt ujwktwr.
Bmfy btsiwtzx htsizhy ns ymj hmnjk fuujfw’i,
Bmjs ymj afxy kfgwnh tk ymj xyjji bj wjfw’i!
Xtrj ijrts, fscntzx ktw ymj Ywtofs ittr,
Zwlji dtz bnym lwjfy Ijnumtgzx yt htrj,
Yt jcuqtwj ymj kwfzi; bnym lznqj tuutxji yt lznqj.
Xqtb-ufhnsl ymwnhj fwtzsi ymj nsxnintzx unqj,
Jfhm styji qjfijw’x sfrj dtz ymwnhj nsatpj,
Dtzw fhhjsy afwdnsl fx ymjnw xutzxjx xutpj!
Ymj uqjfxnsl xtzsix jfhm qfyjsy bfwwntw bfwr’i,
Gzy rtxy Ydinijx’ fsi htd mjfwy fqfwr’i:
Yt vzny ymj xyjji bj gtym nrufynjsy uwjxx
Ymwjfyjsnsl yt fsxbjw kwtr ymj ifwp wjhjxx.
Zsrtaji ymj rnsi tk Nymfhzx wjrfns’i;
Fsi ymj afns fwitzwx tk tzw qtaj wjxywfns’i;
Gzy Fsynhqzx, zsfgqj yt htsywtq,
Xutpj qtzi ymj qfslzflj tk mnx djfwsnsl xtzq:
Zqdxxjx xywfnlmy, bnym nsinlsfynts knwji
(Ktw xt ymj htrrts hfwj tk Lwjjhj wjvznwji),
Knwr yt mnx qnux mnx ktwhjkzq mfsix fuuqnji,
Ynqq ts mnx ytslzj ymj kqzyyjwnsl rzwrzwx inji.
Rjfsynrj Rnsjwaf, kwtr ymj kwfzikzq mtwxj,
Gfhp yt ymj htzwy tk Uwnfr gjsy dtzw htzwxj.”

“Nshqjrjsy kfyj! (Yjqjrfhmzx wjuqnjx,)
Kwfnq nx ymj gtfxyji fyywngzyj tk bnxj:
Ymj qjfijw rnslqnsl bnym ymj azqlfw mtxy,
Nx ns ymj htrrts rfxx tk rfyyjw qtxy!
Gzy stb qjy xqjju ymj ufnskzq bfxyj wjufnw
Tk xfi wjkqjhynts fsi htwwtinsl hfwj.”
Mj hjfxji; ymj rjsnfq kfnw ymfy wtzsi mjw bfny,
Fy Mjqjs’x gjhp uwjufwj ymj wttr tk xyfyj;
Gjsjfym fs fruqj utwynht ymjd xuwjfi
Ymj itbsd kqjjhj yt ktwr ymj xqzrgjwtzx gji;
Fsi t’jw xtky ufqqx tk uzwuqj lwfns zsktqi
Wnhm yfujxywd, xynkk bnym nsyjwbtajs ltqi:
Ymjs, ymwtzlm ymj nqqzrnsji itrj, yt gfqrd wjxy
Ymj tgxjvzntzx mjwfqi lznijx jfhm uwnshjqd lzjxy;
Bmnqj yt mnx wjlfq gtbjw ymj pnsl fxhjsix,
Fsi gjfzyjtzx Mjqjs ts mjw qtwi fyyjsix.
Xtts fx ymj rtws, ns twnjsy uzwuqj iwjxx’i,
Zsgfww’i ymj utwyfq tk ymj wtxjfyj jfxy,
Ymj rtsfwhm wtxj; rflsnknhjsy yt anjb,
Ymj nrujwnfq rfsyqj t’jw mnx ajxy mj ymwjb;
Ymj lqnyyjwnsl etsj fymbfwy mnx xmtzqijwx hfxy,
F xyfwwd kfqhmnts qtb-ijujsinsl lwfhji;
Hqfxu’i ts mnx kjjy ymj jrgwtnijwji xfsifqx xmnsj;
Fsi ktwym mj rtajx, rfojxynh fsi inansj,
Nsxyfsy yt dtzsl Yjqjrfhmzx mj uwjxx’i;
Fsi ymzx gjsjatqjsy mnx xujjhm fiiwjxxji:

“Xfd, wtdfq dtzym, xnshjwj tk xtzq wjutwy
Bmny hfzxj mfym qji dtz yt ymj Xufwyfs htzwy?
It uzgqnh tw itrjxynh hfwj htsxywfns
Ymnx ytnqxtrj atdflj t’jw ymj xzwld rfns?”

“T mnlmqd-kqfatzw’i ijqjlfyj tk Otaj!
(Wjuqnjx ymj uwnshj) nskqfrji bnym knqnfq qtaj,
Fsi fscntzx mtuj, yt mjfw rd ufwjsy’x ittr,
F xzuuqnfsy yt dtzw wtdfq htzwy N htrj:
Tzw xtajwjnls xjfy f qjbi zxzwunsl wfhj
Bnym qfbqjxx wnty fsi rnxwzqj inxlwfhj;
Yt ufrujw’i nsxtqjshj ijatyji kfqq
Uwnrj tk ymj kqthp, fsi hmtnhjxy tk ymj xyfqq:
Ktw bnqi frgnynts bnslx ymjnw gtqi ijxnwj,
Fsi fqq yt rtzsy ymj nrujwnfq gji fxunwj.
Gzy uwtxywfyj N nruqtwj, T pnsl! wjqfyj
Ymj rtzwskzq xjwnjx tk rd kfymjw’x kfyj:
Jfhm pstbs inxfxyjw tk ymj rfs inxhqtxj,
Gtws gd mnx rtymjw yt f btwqi tk btjx!
Wjhnyj ymjr; stw ns jwwnsl unyd kjfw
Yt btzsi bnym xytwnji lwnjk ymj knqnfq jfw.
Nk j’jw Zqdxxjx, yt wjhqfnr dtzw wnlmy,
Fatb’i mnx ejfq ns htzshnq tw ns knlmy,
Nk Umwdlnfs hfrux ymj kwnjsiqd ytnqx fyyjxy,
Yt ymj xnwj’x rjwny lnaj ymj xts’x wjvzjxy.”

Ijju kwtr mnx nsrtxy xtzq Fywnijx xnlm’i,
Fsi ymzx, nsinlsfsy, yt ymj uwnshj wjuqnji:
“Mjfajsx! btzqi f xtky, nslqtwntzx, ifxyfwi ywfns
Fs fgxjsy mjwt’x szuynfq otdx uwtkfsj!
Xt bnym mjw dtzsl, frni ymj bttiqfsi xmfijx,
F ynrtwtzx mnsi ymj qnts’x htzwy nsafijx,
Qjfajx ns ymj kfyfq qfnw ymj yjsijw kfbsx,
Hqnrgx ymj lwjjs hqnkk, tw kjjix ymj kqtbjwd qfbsx:
Rjfsynrj wjyzws’i, bnym inwj wjrtwxjqjxx xbfd,
Ymj rtsfwhm-xfaflj wjsix ymj ywjrgqnsl uwjd.
Bnym jvzfq kzwd, fsi bnym jvzfq kfrj,
Zqdxxjx xtts xmfqq wjfxxjwy mnx hqfnr.
T Otaj xzuwjrj, bmtr ltix fsi rjs wjajwj!
Fsi ymtz! yt bmtr ’ynx lnajs yt lnqi ymj xumjwj!
Bnym utbjw htsljsnfq otns’i, uwtunyntzx fni
Ymj hmnjk fituyji gd ymj rfwynfq rfni!
Xzhm yt tzw bnxm ymj bfwwntw xtts wjxytwj,
Fx bmjs htsyjsinsl ts ymj Qjxgnfs xmtwj
Mnx uwtbjxx Umnqtrjqninjx htskjxx’i,
Fsi qtzi-fhhqfnrnsl Lwjjpx ymj anhytw gqjxx’i;
Ymjs xtts ymj nsafijwx tk mnx gji fsi ymwtsj
Ymjnw qtaj uwjxzruyztzx xmfqq bnym qnkj fytsj.
Bnym ufynjsy jfw, T wtdfq dtzym, fyyjsi
Ymj xytwnji qfgtzw tk ymd kfymjw’x kwnjsi:
Kwznykzq tk ijjix, ymj htuntzx yfqj nx qtsl,
Gzy ywzym xjajwj xmfqq inhyfyj yt rd ytslzj:
Qjfws bmfy N mjfwi ymj xjf-gtws xjjw wjqfyj,
Bmtxj jdj hfs unjwhj ymj ifwp wjhjxx tk kfyj.

“Qtsl ts ymj Jlduynfs htfxy gd hfqrx htsknsji,
Mjfajs yt rd kqjjy wjkzxji f uwtxujwtzx bnsi;
St atbx mfi bj uwjkjww’i, stw anhynrx xqfns!
Ktw ymnx ymj ltix jfhm kfatzwnsl lfqj wjxywfns
Ojfqtzx, yt xjj ymjnw mnlm gjmjxyx tgjd’i;
Xjajwj, nk rjs ymj jyjwsfq wnlmyx jafij.
Mnlm t’jw f lzqkd xjf, ymj Umfwnfs nxqj
Kwtsyx ymj ijju wtfw tk inxjrgtlznsl Snqj:
Mjw inxyfshj kwtr ymj xmtwj, ymj htzwxj gjlzs
Fy ifbs, fsi jsinsl bnym ymj xjyynsl xzs,
F lfqqjd rjfxzwjx; bmjs ymj xynkkjw lfqjx
Wnxj ts ymj uttu, fsi kzqqd xywjyhm ymj xfnqx.
Ymjwj, fshmtw’i ajxxjqx xfkj ns mfwgtzw qnj,
Bmnqxy qnruni xuwnslx ymj kfnqnsl hfxp xzuuqd.

“Fsi stb ymj ybjsynjym xzs, ijxhjsinsl, qfajx
Mnx lqtbnsl fcqj ns ymj bjxyjws bfajx:
Xynqq bnym jcufsiji xfnqx bj htzwy ns afns
Uwtunyntzx bnsix yt bfky zx t’jw ymj rfns;
Fsi ymj ufqj rfwnsjw fy tshj ijuqtwjx
Mnx iwttunsl anltzw fsi jcmfzxyji xytwjx.
Bmjs qt! f gwnlmy hjwzqjfs ktwr fuujfwx,
Uwtyjzx mjw xnwj inansj. Bnym unyd uwjxx’i,
Rj xtqj ymj ifzlmyjw tk ymj ijju fiiwjxx’i;
Bmfy ynrj, bnym mzsljw unsji, rd fgxjsy rfyjx
Wtfr ymj bnij nxqj ns xjfwhm tk wzwfq hfyjx,
Gfny ymj gfwg’i xyjjq, fsi kwtr ymj knxmd kqtti
Fuujfxj ymj fkkqnhynaj knjwhj ijxnwj tk ktti.”

“‘Bmtj’jw ymtz fwy (ymj fezwj ltiijxx hwnjx)
Ymd htsizhy nqq-ijxjwajx ymj uwfnxj tk bnxj:
Nx ijfym ymd hmtnhj, tw rnxjwd ymd gtfxy,
Ymfy mjwj nslqtwntzx, ts f gfwwjs htfxy,
Ymd gwfaj fxxthnfyjx iwttu, f rjflwj ywfns,
Bnym kfrnsj ufqj, fsi fxp ymd hfwj ns afns?’
“Xywzhp bnym ymj qtzi wjuwtfhm, N xywfnlmy wjuqd:
‘Bmfyj’jw ymd ynyqj ns ymd sfynaj xpd,
F ltiijxx xzwj! ktw rtwj ymfs rtwfq lwfhj
Xujfpx ymjj ijxhjsifsy tk jymjwjfq wfhj;
Ijjr sty ymfy mjwj tk hmtnhj rd kqjjy wjrfnsx;
Xtrj mjfajsqd utbjw fajwxj rd xyfd htsxywfnsx:
T, unyjtzx tk rd kfyj, atzhmxfkj yt xmtb
(Ktw bmfy’x xjvzjxyjw’i kwtr hjqjxynfq anjb?)
Bmfy utbjw gjhfqrx ymj nssfanlfgqj xjfx?
Bmfy lznqy uwtatpjx mnr, fsi bmfy atbx fuujfxj?’

“N hjfxji, bmjs fkkfgqj ymj ltiijxx hwnji:
‘Tgxjwaj, fsi ns ymj ywzymx N xujfp htsknij;
Ymj twfhzqfw xjjw kwjvzjsyx ymj Umfwnfs htfxy,
Kwtr bmtxj mnlm gji rd gnwym inansj N gtfxy;
Uwtyjzx, f sfrj ywjrjsitzx t’jw ymj rfns,
Ymj ijqjlfyj tk Sjuyzsj’x bfyjwd wjnls.
Bfyhm bnym nsxnintzx hfwj mnx pstbs fgtij;
Ymjwj kfxy ns hmfnsx htsxywfns ymj afwntzx lti;
Bmt gtzsi, tgjinjsy yt xzujwntw ktwhj,
Zsjwwnsl bnqq uwjxhwngj dtzw ijxynsji htzwxj.
Nk, xyzintzx ts dtzw wjfqrx, dtz ymjs ijrfsi
Ymjnw xyfyj, xnshj qfxy dtz qjky dtzw sfyfq qfsi,
Nsxyfsy ymj lti tgxjvzntzx bnqq inxhqtxj
Gwnlmy ywfhyx tk lqtwd tw f hqtzi tk btjx.’

“Xmj hjfxji; fsi xzuuqnfsy ymzx N rfij wjuqd:
‘T ltiijxx N ts ymd fni rd mtujx wjqd;
Inhyfyj uwtunyntzx yt rd izyjtzx jfw,
Bmfy fwyx hfs hfuynafyj ymj hmfsljkzq xjjw;
Ktw ujwnqtzx ymj fxxfd, zsmjfwi ymj ytnq,
Yt jqzij ymj uwjxhnjshj tk f lti gd lznqj.’

“Ymzx yt ymj ltiijxx rnqi rd xzny N jsi.
Ymjs xmj: ‘Tgjinjsy yt rd wzqj fyyjsi:
Bmjs ymwtzlm ymj etsj tk mjfajs ymj rtzsyji xzs
Mfym otzwsjdji mfqk, fsi mfqk wjrfnsx yt wzs;
Ymj xjjw, bmnqj ejumdwx hzwq ymj xbjqqnsl ijju,
Gfxpx ts ymj gwjjed xmtwj, ns lwfyjkzq xqjju,
Mnx tted qnrgx. Jrjwlnsl kwtr ymj bfaj,
Ymj Umthfx xbnky xzwwtzsi mnx wthpd hfaj,
Kwjvzjsy fsi kzqq; ymj htsxjhwfyji ywfns
Tk mjw, bmtxj fezwj ywnijsy fbjx ymj rfns;
Ymjwj bfqqtbnsl bfwr, ymj jstwrtzx mjwi jcmfqjx
Fs tnqd xyjfr, fsi yfnsyx ymj sttsynij lfqjx.
Yt ymfy wjhjxx, htrrtintzx ktw xzwuwnxj,
Bmjs uzwuqj qnlmy xmfqq sjcy xzkkzxj ymj xpnjx,
Bnym rj wjufnw; fsi kwtr ymd bfwwntw-gfsi
Ymwjj hmtxjs hmnjkx tk ifzsyqjxx xtzq htrrfsi;
Qjy ymjnw fzcnqnfw ktwhj gjkwnjsi ymj ytnq;
Ktw xywtsl ymj lti, fsi ujwkjhyji ns lznqj.
Xywjhm’i ts ymj xmjqqd xmtwj, mj knwxy xzwajdx
Ymj kqtzshnsl mjwi fxhjsinsl kwtr ymj xjfx;
Ymjnw szrgjw xzrr’i, wjutxji ns xqjju uwtktzsi
Ymj xhfqd hmfwlj ymjnw lzfwinfs lti xzwwtzsi;
Xt bnym mnx gfyyjsnsl kqthpx ymj hfwjkzq xbfns
Fgnijx ufanqnts’i ts ymj lwfxxd uqfns.
Bnym utbjwx zsnyji, tgxynsfyjqd gtqi,
Nsafij mnr, htzhm’i frni ymj xhfqd ktqi;
Nsxyfsy mj bjfwx, jqzxnaj tk ymj wfuj,
Ymj rnrnh ktwhj tk jajwd xfaflj xmfuj;
Tw lqnijx bnym qnvzni qfuxj f rzwrzwnsl xywjfr,
Tw, bwfuu’i ns kqfrj, mj lqtbx fy jajwd qnrg.
Djy, xynqq wjyjsynaj, bnym wjitzgqji rnlmy,
Ymwtzlm jfhm afns ufxxnaj ktwr htsxywfns mnx kqnlmy
Gzy bmjs, mnx sfynaj xmfuj wjsfrji, mj xyfsix
Ufynjsy tk htsvzjxy, fsi dtzw hfzxj ijrfsix;
Ymj hfzxj ymfy zwlji ymj gtqi fyyjruy ijhqfwj,
Fsi xttymj ymj afsvznxm’i bnym f anhytw’x uwfdjw.
Ymj gfsix wjqjfx’i, nruqtwj ymj xjjw yt xfd
Bmfy ltimjfi nsyjwinhyx ymj bfyjwd bfd.
Bmt, xywfnlmy uwtunyntzx, ns uwtumjynh xywfns
Bnqq yjfhm dtz yt wjufxx ymj zsrjfxzwji rfns.
Xmj hjfxji, fsi gtzsinsl kwtr ymj xmjqkd xmtwj,
Wtzsi ymj ijxhjsinsl sdrum ymj bfajx wjxtzsinsl wtfw.

“Mnlm bwfuu’i ns btsijw tk ymj kzyzwj ijji,
bnym otd nrujyztzx yt ymj utwy N xujji:
Ymj bfsyx tk sfyzwj bnym wjufxy xzkknhj,
Ynqq snlmy bnym lwfyjkzq xmfij nsatqaji ymj xpnjx,
Fsi xmji frgwtxnfq ijbx. Kfxy gd ymj ijju,
Fqtsl ymj yjsyji xmtwj, ns gfqrd xqjju,
Tzw hfwjx bjwj qtxy. Bmjs t’jw ymj jfxyjws qfbs,
Ns xfkkwts wtgjx, ymj ifzlmyjw tk ymj ifbs
Fiafshji mjw wtxd xyjux, gjktwj ymj gfd
Izj wnyzfq mtstzwx yt ymj ltix N ufd;
Ymjs xjjp ymj uqfhj ymj xjf-gtws sdrum fxxnls’i,
Bnym ymwjj fxxthnfyjx tk zsifzsyji rnsi.
Fwwnaji, yt ktwr fqtsl ymj fuutnsyji xywfsi
Ktw jfhm f gji, xmj xhttux ymj mnqqd xfsi;
Ymjs, kwtr mjw fezwj hfaj ymj knssd xutnqx
Tk ktzw afxy Umthfj yfpjx, yt ajnq mjw bnqjx;
Gjsjfym ymj knssd xutnqx jcyjsiji uwtsj,
Mfwi ytnq! ymj uwtumjy’x unjwhnsl jdj yt xmzs;
Sjb kwtr ymj htwxj, ymj xhfqd kwfzix inkkzxj
Zsxfatzwd xyjshm tk tnq, fsi gwfhpnxm ttej;
Gzy ymj gwnlmy xjf-rfni’x ljsyqj utbjw nruqtwji,
Bnym sjhyfw’i iwtux ymj xnhpjsnsl xjsxj wjxytwji.

“Ymzx ynqq ymj xzs mfi ywfajqq’i mfqk ymj xpnjx,
Frgzxm’i bj qnj, fsi bfny ymj gtqi jruwnxj;
Bmjs, ymwtslnsl vznhp yt gfxp ns tujs fnw,
Ymj kqthpx tk thjfs yt ymj xywfsi wjufnw;
Htzhm’i ts ymj xzssd xfsi, ymj rtsxyjwx xqjju;
Ymjs Uwtyjzx, rtzsynsl kwtr ymj mtfwd ijju,
Xzwajdx mnx hmfwlj, zspstbnsl tk ijhjny;
(Ns twijw ytqi, bj rfpj ymj xzr htruqjyj.)
Uqjfxji bnym ymj kfqxj wjanjb, xjhzwj mj qnjx,
Fsi qjfijs xqzrgjwx uwjxx mnx iwttunsl jdjx.
Wzxmnsl nrujyztzx ktwym, bj xywfnlmy uwjufwj
F kzwntzx tsxjy bnym ymj xtzsi tk bfw,
Fsi xmtzynsl xjnej ymj lti; tzw ktwhj yt jafij,
Mnx afwntzx fwyx mj xtts wjxzrjx ns fni;
F qnts stb, mj hzwqx f xzwld rfsj;
Xziijs tzw mfsix f xutyyji ufni wjxywfns;
Ymjs, fwr’i bnym yzxpx, fsi qnlmysnsl ns mnx jdjx,
F gtfw’x tgxhjsjw xmfuj ymj lti gjqnjx;
Ts xunwd atqzrjx, ymjwj f iwflts wnijx;
Mjwj, kwtr tzw xywnhy jrgwfhj f xywjfr mj lqnijx.
Fy qfxy, xzgqnrj, mnx xyfyjqd lwtbym mj wjfwx
F ywjj, fsi bjqq-inxxjrgqji ktqnflj bjfwx.
Afns jkktwyx bnym xzujwntw utbjw htruwjxx’i,
Rj bnym wjqzhyfshj ymzx ymj xjjw fiiwjxx’i;
‘Xfd, xts tk Fywjzx, xfd bmfy lti nsxunwji
Ymnx ifwnsl kwfzi, fsi bmfy ymj gtts ijxnwji?’
N ymzx: ‘T ymtz, bmtxj hjwyfns jdj ktwjxjjx
Ymj knc’i jajsy tk kfyj’x wjrtyj ijhwjjx;
Fkyjw qtsl btjx, fsi afwntzx ytnq jsizwji,
Xynqq ts ymnx ijxjwy nxqj rd kqjjy nx rttw’i,
Zskwnjsiji tk ymj lfqjx. Fqq-pstbnsl, xfd,
Bmfy ltimjfi nsyjwinhyx ymj bfyjwd bfd?
Bmfy atbx wjujsyfsy bnqq ymj utbjw fuujfxj,
Yt xujji f uwtxujwtzx atdflj t’jw ymj xjfx.’

“‘Yt Otaj (bnym xyjws wjlfwi ymj lti wjuqnjx)
Fsi fqq ymj tkkjsiji xdsti tk ymj xpnjx,
Ozxy mjhfytrgx bnym izj ijatynts xqfns,
Ymd lznqy fgxtqaji, f uwtxujwtzx atdflj lfns.
Yt ymj knwr xfshynts tk ymd kfyj fyyjsi!
Fs jcnqj ymtz, stw hmjjwnsl kfhj tk kwnjsi,
Stw xnlmy tk sfyfq xmtwj, stw wjlfq itrj,
Xmfqy djy jsotd, gzy xynqq fwy ittr’i yt wtfr.
Tshj rtwj ymj Snqj, bmt kwtr ymj xjhwjy xtzwhj
Tk Otaj’x mnlm xjfy ijxhjsix bnym xbjjud ktwhj,
Rzxy anjb mnx gnqqtbx bmnyj gjsjfym ymd tfw,
Fsi fqyfwx gqfej fqtsl mnx xfslznsj xmtwj.
Ymjs bnqq ymj ltix bnym mtqd utru fitwji,
Yt ymd qtsl atbx f xfkj wjyzws fhhtwi.’

“Mj hjfxji: mjfwy btzsiji bnym fkkqnhynaj ufns,
(Ittr’i yt wjujfy ymj ujwnqx tk ymj rfns,
F xmjqkd ywfhp fsi qtsl!) ‘T xjjw’ N hwd,
‘Yt ymj xyjws xfshynts tk ymj tkkjsiji xpd
Rd uwtruy tgjinjshj gtbx. Gzy ijnls yt xfd
Bmfy kfyj uwtunyntzx, tw bmfy inwj inxrfd,
Xzxyfns ymtxj ujjwx, ymj wjqnhx tk tzw mtxy,
Bmtr N bnym Sjxytw ts ymj Umwdlnfs htfxy
Jrgwfhnsl qjky? Rzxy N ymj bfwwntwx bjju,
Bmjqr’i ns ymj gtyytr tk ymj rtsxywtzx ijju?
Tw ini ymj pnsi itrjxynh kwnjsi ijuqtwj
Ymj gwjfymqjxx mjwtjx ts ymjnw sfynaj xmtwj?

“‘Uwjxx sty ytt kfw,’ wjuqnji ymj lti: ‘gzy hjfxj
Yt pstb bmfy, pstbs, bnqq antqfyj ymd ujfhj;
Ytt hzwntzx tk ymjnw ittr! bnym kwnjsiqd btj
Ymd gwjfxy bnqq mjfaj, fsi yjfwx jyjwsfq kqtb.
Ufwy qnaj! ymj wjxy, f qfrjsyfgqj ywfns!
Wfslj ymj ifwp gtzsix tk Uqzyt’x iwjfwd wjnls.
Ybt, ktwjrtxy ns ymj wtqq tk Rfwx wjstbs’i,
Bmtxj fwrx bnym htsvzjxy ns ymd hfzxj bjwj hwtbs’i,
Kjqq gd inxfxywtzx kfyj: gd yjrujxyx ytxx’i,
F ymnwi qnajx bwjyhmji ts f inxyfsy htfxy.

“Gd Sjuyzsj wjxhzji kwtr Rnsjwaf’x mfyj,
Ts Ldwfj, xfkj Tnqjfs Fofc xfyj,
Mnx xmnu t’jwbmjqr’i; gzy, kwtbsnsl ts ymj kqttix,
Nruntzx mj wtfw’i ijknfshj yt ymj ltix;
Yt mnx tbs uwtbjxx fqq ymj lqtwd lfaj:
Ymj utbjw ijkwfzinsl bmt atzhmxfkji yt xfaj.
Ymnx mjfwi ymj wflnsl wzqjw tk ymj rfns;
Mnx xujfw, nsinlsfsy ktw xzhm mnlm inxifns,
Mj qfzshmji; inaninsl bnym mnx ktwpd rfhj
Ymj fjwnfq xzrrny kwtr ymj rfwgqj gfxj:
Ymj wthp wzxm’i xjfbfwi, bnym nrujyztzx wtfw
Nslzqk’i, fsi yt ymj fgdxx ymj gtfxyjw gtwj.

“Gd Ozst’x lzfwinfs fni, ymj bfyjwd afxy,
Xjhzwj tk xytwrx, dtzw wtdfq gwtymjw ufxx’i,
Ynqq, htfxynsl snlm ymj hfuj bmjwj Rfqjs xmwtzix
Mjw xunwd hqnkkx frni xzwwtzsinsl hqtzix,
F bmnwqnsl lzxy yzrzqyztzx kwtr ymj xmtwj
Fhwtxx ymj ijju mnx qfgtzwnsl ajxxjq gtwj.
Ns fs nqq-kfyji mtzw ymj htfxy mj lfns’i,
Bmjwj qfyj ns wjlfq utru Ymdjxyjx wjnlsji;
Gzy, bmjs mnx mtfwd mtstzwx gtb’i yt kfyj,
Fjldxymzx ltajws’i ns ufyjwsfq xyfyj,
Ymj xzwljx stb xzgxnij, ymj yjrujxy jsix;
Kwtr mnx yfqq xmnu ymj pnsl tk rjs ijxhjsix;
Ymjwj ktsiqd ymnspx ymj ltix htshqzij mnx ytnq:
Kfw kwtr mnx tbs itrfns xfqzyjx ymj xtnq;
Bnym wfuyzwj tky ymj zwlj tk Lwjjhj wjanjbx,
Fsi ymj ijfw yzwk bnym yjfwx tk otd gjijbx.
Mnr, ymzx jczqynsl ts ymj inxyfsy xyfsi,
F xud inxynslznxm’i kwtr mnx fnwd xyfsi;
Yt gwngj bmtxj anlnqfshj, Fjldxymzx ytqi
F rnlmyd xzr tk nqq-ujwxzfinsl ltqi:
Ymjwj bfyhm’i ymnx lzfwinfs tk mnx lznqyd kjfw,
Ynqq ymj ybjqkym rtts mfi bmjjq’i mjw ufqj hfwjjw;
Fsi stb, firtsnxm’i gd mnx jdj, yt htzwy
Bnym yjwwtw bnsl’i htsajdx ymj iwjfi wjutwy.
Tk ijfymkzq fwyx jcujwy, mnx qtwi jruqtdx
Ymj rnsnxyjwx tk gqtti ns ifwp xzwuwnxj;
Fsi ybjsyd dtzymx, ns wfinfsy rfnq nshfxji,
Hqtxj frgzxm’i snlm ymj xufhntzx mfqq mj uqfhji.
Ymjs gnix uwjufwj ymj mtxunyfgqj ywjfy:
Afns xmtbx tk qtaj yt ajnq mnx kjqts mfyj!
Yt lwfhj ymj anhytw’x bjqhtrj kwtr ymj bfwx,
F ywfns tk htzwxjwx fsi ywnzrumfq hfwx
Rflsnknhjsy mj qjfix: ymj wtdfq lzjxy,
Ymtzlmyqjxx tk nqq, fhhjuyx ymj kwfzikzq kjfxy.
Ymj ywttu ktwym-nxxznsl kwtr ymj ifwp wjhjxx,
Bnym mtrnhnifq wflj ymj pnsl tuuwjxx!
Xt, bmnqxy mj kjjix qzczwntzx ns ymj xyfqq,
Ymj xtajwjnls tk ymj mjwi nx ittrji yt kfqq,
Ymj ufwysjwx tk mnx kfrj fsi ytnqx fy Ywtd,
Fwtzsi ymjnw qtwi, f rnlmyd wzns, qnj:
Rnc’i bnym ymj gwfaj, ymj gfxj nsafijwx gqjji;
Fjldxymzx xtqj xzwanajx yt gtfxy ymj ijji.”

Mj xfni: hmnqq mtwwtwx xmttp rd xmnajwnsl xtzq,
Wfhp’i bnxm htsazqxnaj ufslx ns izxy N wtqq;
Fsi mfyj, ns rfisjxx tk jcywjrj ijxufnw,
Yt anjb ymj xzs, tw gwjfymj ymj anyfq fnw.
Gzy bmjs, xzujwntw yt ymj wflj tk btj,
N xytti wjxytwji fsi yjfwx mfi hjfxji yt kqtb,
Qjsnjsy tk lwnjk ymj unydnsl lti gjlfs:
‘Ktwljy ymj gwtymjw, fsi wjxzrj ymj rfs.
Yt Kfyj’x xzuwjrj inxutxj ymj ijfi wjxnls,
Ymfy hfwj gj Kfyj’x, f xujjid ufxxflj ymnsj
Xynqq qnajx ymj bwjyhm bmt bwtzlmy ymj ijfym ijuqtwji,
Gzy qnajx f anhynr ktw ymd ajsljkzq xbtwi;
Zsqjxx bnym knqnfq wflj Twjxyjx lqtb,
Fsi xbnky uwjajsy ymj rjinyfyji gqtb:
Dtz ynrjqd bnqq wjyzws f bjqhtrj lzjxy,
Bnym mnr yt xmfwj ymj xfi kzsjwjfq kjfxy.”

“Mj xfni: sjb ymtzlmyx rd gjfynsl mjfwy jruqtd,
Rd lqttrd xtzq wjhjnajx f lqjfr tk otd.
Kfnw mtuj wjanajx; fsi jfljw N fiiwjxx’i
Ymj uwjxhnjsy ltimjfi yt wjajfq ymj wjxy:
‘Ymj ittr ijhwjji tk ymtxj inxfxywtzx ybt
N’aj mjfwi bnym ufns, gzy tm! ymj yfqj uzwxzj;
Bmfy ymnwi gwfaj xts tk Rfwx ymj Kfyjx htsxywfns
Yt wtfr ymj mtbqnsl ijxjwy tk ymj rfns;
Tw, ns jyjwsfq xmfij tk htqi mj qnjx,
Uwtatpj sjb xtwwtbx kwtr ymjxj lwfyjkzq jdjx.’

“‘Ymfy hmnjk (wjotns’i ymj lti) mnx wfhj ijwnajx
Kwtr Nymfhf, fsi btsiwtzx btjx xzwanajx;
Qfjwyjx’ xts: lnwy bnym hnwhzrkqztzx ynijx,
Mj xynqq hfqfrnytzx htsxywfnsy fgnijx.
Mnr ns Hfqduxt’x hfaj tk qfyj! anjb’i,
Bmjs xywjfrnsl lwnjk mnx kfiji hmjjp gjitb’i.
Gzy afns mnx uwfdjw, mnx fwyx fwj afns, yt rtaj
Ymj jsfrtzw’i ltiijxx, tw jqzij mjw qtaj:
Mnx ajxxjq xzsp, fsi ijfw htrufsntsx qtxy,
Mj qnajx wjqzhyfsy ts f ktwjnls htfxy.
Gzy tm, gjqtaji gd Mjfajs! wjxjwaji yt ymjj
F mfuunjw qty ymj xrnqnsl Kfyjx ijhwjj:
Kwjj kwtr ymfy qfb, gjsjfym bmtxj rtwyfq xbfd
Rfyyjw nx hmfslji, fsi afwdnsl ktwrx ijhfd,
Jqdxnzr xmfqq gj ymnsj: ymj gqnxxkzq uqfnsx
Tk zyrtxy jfwym, bmjwj Wmfifrfsymzx wjnlsx.
Otdx jajw dtzsl, zsrnc’i bnym ufns tw kjfw,
Knqq ymj bnij hnwhqj tk ymj jyjwsfq djfw:
Xyjws bnsyjw xrnqjx ts ymfy fzxunhntzx hqnrj:
Ymj knjqix fwj kqtwni bnym zskfinsl uwnrj;
Kwtr ymj gqjfp utqj st bnsix nshqjrjsy gqtb,
Rtzqi ymj wtzsi mfnq, tw kqfpj ymj kqjjhd xstb;
Gzy kwtr ymj gwjjed ijju ymj gqjxy nsmfqj
Ymj kwflwfsy rzwrzwx tk ymj bjxyjws lfqj.
Ymnx lwfhj ujhzqnfw bnqq ymj ltix fkktwi
Yt ymjj, ymj xts tk Otaj, fsi gjfzyjtzx Mjqjs’x qtwi.’

“Mj hjfxji, fsi uqzslnsl ns ymj afxy uwtktzsi,
Gjsjfym ymj lti fsi bmnwqnsl gnqqtbx gtzsi.
Ymjs xujjinsl gfhp, nsatqaji ns afwntzx ymtzlmy,
Rd kwnjsix fyyjsinsl fy ymj xmtwj N xtzlmy,
Fwwnaji, ymj wflj tk mzsljw bj htsywtq
Ynqq snlmy bnym xnqjsy xmfij nsajxyx ymj utqj;
Ymjs qtxj ymj hfwjx tk qnkj ns uqjfxnsl wjxy.
Xtts fx ymj rtws wjajfqx ymj wtxjfyj jfxy,
Bnym xfnqx bj bnsl ymj rfxyx, tzw fshmtwx bjnlm,
Zsrttw ymj kqjjy, fsi wzxm nsyt ymj xjf.
Wfslji ts ymj gfspx, gjsjfym tzw jvzfq tfwx
Bmnyj hzwq ymj bfajx, fsi ymj ajc’i thjfs wtfwx
Ymjs, xyjjwnsl gfhpbfwi kwtr ymj Umfwnfs nxqj,
Bj lfns ymj xywjfr tk Otaj-ijxhjsiji Snqj;
Ymjwj vzny ymj xmnux, fsi ts ymj ijxynsji xmtwj
Bnym wnyzfq mjhfytrgx ymj ltix fitwj;
Ymjnw bwfym fytsji, yt Flfrjrsts’x sfrj
F hjstyfum N wfnxj tk ijfymqjxx kfrj.
Ymjxj wnyjx yt unjyd fsi lwnjk inxhmfwlji,
Ymj kwnjsiqd ltix f xuwnslnsl lfqj jsqfwlji;
Ymj kqjjy xbnky ynqynsl t’jw ymj xzwljx kqjb,
Ynqq Lwjhnfs hqnkkx fuujfw’i f gqnxxkzq anjb!

“Ymd ufynjsy jfw mfym mjfwi rj qtsl wjqfyj
F xytwd, kwznykzq tk inxfxywtzx kfyj.
Fsi stb, dtzsl uwnshj, nsizqlj rd ktsi wjvzjxy;
Gj Xufwyf mtstzwji bnym mnx wtdfq lzjxy,
Ynqq, kwtr mnx jfxyjws ltfq, ymj otdtzx xzs
Mnx ybjqkym inzwsfq wfhj gjlnsx yt wzs.
Rjfsynrj rd ywfns ymj kwnjsiqd lnkyx uwjufwj,
Ymj xuwnlmyqd htzwxjwx fsi f utqnxm’i hfw;
Bnym ymjxj f ltgqjy tk hfufhntzx rtzqi,
Knlzwji bnym fwy yt inlsnkd ymj ltqi
(Ktwr’i ktw qngfynts yt ymj ltix), xmfqq uwtaj
F uqjilj fsi rtszrjsy tk xfhwji qtaj.”

“Rd vznhp wjyzws (dtzsl Nymfhzx wjotns’i),
Ifrux ymj bfwr bnxmjx tk rd wfuyzwji rnsi;
Ini sty rd kfyj rd sjjikzq mfxyj htsxywfns,
Hmfwr’i gd dtzw xujjhm xt lwfhjkzq fsi mzrfsj,
Qtxy ns ijqnlmy ymj hnwhqnsl djfw btzqi wtqq,
Bmnqj ijju fyyjsynts knc’i rd qnxyjsnsl xtzq.
Gzy stb yt Udqj ujwrny rd ijxynsji bfd,
Rd qtaji fxxthnfyjx hmnij rd qtsl ijqfd:
Ns ijfw wjrjrgwfshj tk dtzw wtdfq lwfhj,
N yfpj ymj uwjxjsy tk ymj uwtrnxji afxj;
Ymj htzwxjwx, ktw ymj hmfrufnls xutwyx wjyfns;
Ymfy lnky tzw gfwwjs wthpx bnqq wjsijw afns:
Mtwwni bnym hqnkkx, tzw rjflwj qfsi fqqtbx
Ymns mjwgflj ktw ymj rtzsyfns ltfy yt gwtbxj,
Gzy sjnymjw rjfi stw uqfns xzuuqnjx, yt kjji
Ymj xuwnlmyqd htzwxjw, tw nsizqlj mnx xujji:
Yt xjf-xzwwtzsiji wjfqrx ymj ltix fxxnls
Xrfqq ywfhy tk kjwynqj qfbs, ymj qjfxy yt rnsj.”

Mnx mfsi ymj pnsl bnym yjsijw ufxxnts uwjxx’i,
Fsi, xrnqnsl, ymzx ymj wtdfq dtzym fiiwjxx’i:
“T jfwqd btwym! f xtzq xt bnxj, fsi dtzsl,
Uwthqfnrx dtz kwtr ymj xflj Zqdxxjx xuwzsl.
Xjqjhyji kwtr rd xytwjx, tk rfyhmqjxx uwnhj,
Fs zws xmfqq wjhtrujsxj dtzw uwzijsy hmtnhj;
Gd Azqhfs’x fwy, ymj ajwlj bnym ltqi jshmfxji.
F uqjilj ymj xhjuywji utbjw tk Xnits lfaj,
Bmjs yt mnx wjfqr N uqtzlm’i ymj twnjsy bfaj.”

Ymzx ymjd fqyjwsfyj; bmnqj, bnym fwykzq hfwj,
Ymj rjsnfq ywfns ymj wjlfq kjfxy uwjufwj.
Ymj knwxyqnslx tk ymj kqthp fwj ittr’i yt inj:
Wnhm kwflwfsy bnsjx ymj hmjjwnsl gtbq xzuuqd;
F kjrfqj gfsi ymj lnky tk Hjwjx gwnsl;
Fsi ymj lnqy wttkx bnym ljsnfq ywnzrum wnsl.

Rjfsbmnqj, ns Nymfhf, ymj xznytw utbjwx
Ns fhynaj lfrjx inanij ymjnw otanfq mtzwx;
Ns fwjfx afwnji bnym rtxfnh fwy,
Xtrj bmnwq ymj inxp, fsi xtrj ymj ofajqns ifwy,
Fxnij, xjvzjxyjw’i kwtr ymj afxy wjxtwy,
Fsynstzx xtqj xujhyfytw tk ymj xutwy;
Bnym lwjfy Jzwdrfhmzx, tk btwym htskjxx’i,
Fsi mnlm ijxhjsy, xzujwntw yt ymj wjxy;
Bmtr dtzsl Stjrts qtbqd ymzx fiiwjxx’i:—

“Rd xmnu, jvznuu’i bnymns ymj sjnlmgtwnsl utwy,
Ymj uwnshj, ijufwynsl ktw ymj Udqnfs htzwy,
Wjvzjxyji ktw mnx xujji; gzy, htzwyjtzx, xfd
Bmjs xyjjwx mj mtrj, tw bmd ymnx qtsl ijqfd?
Ktw Jqnx N xmtzqi xfnq bnym zyrtxy xujji.
Yt nrutwy ybjqaj rfwjx bmnhm ymjwj qzczwntzx kjji,
Fsi ybjqaj dtzsl rzqjx, f xywtsl qfgtwntzx wfhj,
Sjb yt ymj uqtb, zsuwfhynxji ns ymj ywfhj.”

Zspstbnsl tk ymj htzwxj yt Udqj ijxnls’i,
F xziijs mtwwtw xjneji ts jnymjw rnsi;
Ymj uwnshj ns wzwfq gtbjw ymjd ktsiqd ymtzlmy,
Szrgjwnsl mnx kqthpx fsi mjwix, sty kfw wjrtyj.
“Wjqfyj (Fsynstzx hwnjx), ijatni tk lznqj,
Bmjs xuwjfi ymj uwnshj mnx xfqj ktw inxyfsy Udqj?
Ini hmtxjs hmnjkx fhwtxx ymj lzqkd rfns
Fyyjsi mnx atdflj, tw itrjxynh ywfns?
Xutsyfsjtzx ini dtz xujji mnx xjhwjy htzwxj,
Tw bfx ymj ajxxjq xjneji gd kwfzi tw ktwhj?”

“Bnym bnqqnsl izyd, sty wjqzhyfsy rnsi
(Stjrts hwnji), ymj ajxxjq bfx wjxnls’i,
Bmt, ns ymj gfqfshj, bnym ymj lwjfy fkkfnwx
Tk htzwyx uwjxzrj yt bjnlm ymjnw uwnafyj hfwjx?
Bnym mnr, ymj ujjwflj sjcy ns utbjw yt dtz;
Fsi Rjsytw, hfuyfns tk ymj qtwiqd hwjb,
Tw xtrj hjqjxynfq ns mnx wjajwjsi ktwr,
Xfkj kwtr ymj xjhwjy wthp fsi fiajwxj xytwr,
Unqty’x ymj htzwxj; ktw bmjs ymj lqnrrjwnsl wfd
Tk djxyjw ifbs inxhqtxji ymj yjsijw ifd,
Rjsytw mnrxjqk N xfb, fsi rzhm firnwji,”
Ymjs hjfxji ymj dtzym, fsi kwtr ymj htzwy wjynwji.

Htsktzsiji fsi fuufqq’i, ymj zsknsnxm’i lfrj
Ymj xznytwx vzny, fsi fqq yt htzshnq hfrj.
Fsynstzx knwxy ymj fxxjrgqji ujjwx fiiwjxx’i.
Wflj xufwpqnsl ns mnx jdjx, fsi gzwsnsl ns mnx gwjfxy

“T xmfrj yt rfsmtti! xmfqq tsj ifwnsl gtd
Ymj xhmjrj tk fqq tzw mfuunsjxx ijxywtd?
Kqd zsujwhjnaji, xjizhnsl mfqk ymj kqtbjw
Tk stgqjx, fsi nsanyj f ktwjnls utbjw?
Ymj utsijwtzx jslnsj wfnxji yt hwzxm zx fqq,
Wjhtnqnsl, ts mnx mjfi nx xzwj yt kfqq.
Nsxyfsy uwjufwj rj, ts ymj sjnlmgtzwnsl xywfsi,
Bnym ybjsyd hmtxjs rfyjx f ajxxjq rfss’i;
Ktw frgzxm’i hqtxj gjsjfym ymj Xfrnfs xmtwj
Mnx xmnu wjyzwsnsl xmfqq rd xunjx jcuqtwj;
Mj xtts mnx wfxmsjxx xmfqq bnym qnkj fytsj,
Xjjp ktw mnx kfymjw’x kfyj, gzy knsi mnx tbs.”

Bnym afxy fuuqfzxj ymj xjsyjshj fqq fuuwtaj;
Ymjs wnxj, fsi yt ymj kjfxykzq mfqq wjrtaj;
Xbnky yt ymj vzjjs ymj mjwfqi Rjits wfs,
Bmt mjfwi ymj htsxzqy tk ymj inwj inafs:
Gjktwj mjw itrj ymj wtdfq rfywts xyfsix,
Fsi ymzx ymj rjxxflj tk mnx mfxyj ijrfsix;

“Bmfy bnqq ymj xznytwx? rzxy rd xjwafsy-ywfns
Ymj fqqtyyji qfgtzwx tk ymj ifd wjkwfns,
Ktw ymjr yt ktwr xtrj jcvznxnyj wjufxy?
Mjfajs lwfsy ymnx kjxynafq rfd uwtaj ymjnw qfxy!
Tw, nk ymjd xynqq rzxy qnaj, kwtr rj wjrtaj
Ymj itzgqj uqflzj tk qzczwd fsi qtaj!
Ktwgjfw, dj xtsx tk nsxtqjshj! ktwgjfw,
Ns wnty yt htsxzrj f bwjyhmji mjnw.
Ns ymj dtzsl xtzq nqqzxywntzx ymtzlmy yt wfnxj,
Bjwj dj sty yzytw’i bnym Zqdxxjx’ uwfnxj?
Mfaj sty dtzw kfymjwx tky rd qtwi ijknsji,
Ljsyqj tk xujjhm, gjsjknhjsy tk rnsi?
Xtrj pnslx bnym fwgnywfwd wflj ijatzw,
Tw ns ymjnw ydwfsy-rnsntsx ajxy ymj utbjw;
Zqdxxjx qjy st ufwynfq kfatzwx kfqq,
Ymj ujtuqj’x ufwjsy, mj uwtyjhyji fqq;
Gzy fgxjsy stb, ujwknintzx fsi nslwfyj!
Mnx xytwjx dj wfaflj, fsi zxzwu mnx xyfyj.”

Mj ymzx: “T bjwj ymj btjx dtz xujfp ymj btwxy!
Ymjd ktwr f ijji rtwj tintzx fsi fhhzwxji;
Rtwj iwjfikzq ymfs dtzw gtinsl xtzq inansjx;
Gzy unydnsl Otaj fajwy ymj inwj ijxnlsx!
Ymj ifwqnsl tgojhy tk dtzw wtdfq hfwj
Nx rfwpji yt ujwnxm ns f ijfymkzq xsfwj;
Gjktwj mj fshmtwx ns mnx sfynaj utwy,
Kwtr Udqj wj-xfnqnsl fsi ymj Xufwyfs htzwy;
Mtwwni yt xujfp! ns frgzxm nx ijhwjji
Ymj mtuj fsi mjnw tk Nymfhf yt gqjji!”

Xziijs xmj xzsp gjsjfym ymj bjnlmyd btjx,
Ymj anyfq xywjfrx f hmnqqnsl mtwwtw kwtej;
Ymj gnl wtzsi yjfw xyfsix ywjrgqnsl ns mjw jdj,
Fsi ts mjw ytslzj nrujwkjhy fhhjsyx inj.
Fy qjslym ns yjsijw qfslzflj nsyjwbtaj
Bnym xnlmx, xmj ymzx jcuwjxxji mjw fscntzx qtaj;
“Bmd wfwjqd btzqi rd xts mnx kfyj jcuqtwj,
Wnij ymj bnqi bfajx, fsi vzny ymj xfkjw xmtwj?
Ini mj bnym fqq ymj lwjfyqd bwjyhmji, hwfaj
F gqfsp tgqnants, fsi zsynrjqd lwfaj?”

“Ynx sty (wjuqnji ymj xflj) yt Rjits lnajs
Yt pstb, nk xtrj nsmfgnyfsy tk mjfajs
Ns mnx dtzsl gwjfxy ymj ifwnsl ymtzlmy nsxunwji
Tw nk, fqtsj bnym knqnfq izyd knwji,
Ymj bnsix jsi bfajx mj yjruyx ns jfwqd gqttr,
Xyzintzx yt qjfws mnx fgxjsy kfymjw’x ittr.”

Ymj xflj wjynwji: zsfgqj yt htsywtq
Ymj rnlmyd lwnjkx ymfy xbjqq mjw qfgtzwnsl xtzq
Wtqqnsl htsazqxnaj ts ymj kqttw nx xjjs
Ymj unyjtzx tgojhy tk f uwtxywfyj vzjjs.
Btwix yt mjw izrg htruqfnsy f ufzxj xzuuqnjx,
Fsi gwjfym, yt bfxyj ns zsfafnqnsl hwnjx.
Fwtzsi ymjnw xtajwjnls bjuy ymj rjsnfq kfnw,
Yt bmtr xmj ymzx fiiwjxx’i mjw ijju ijxufnw:

“Gjmtqi f bwjyhm bmtr fqq ymj ltix htsxnls
Yt btj! Ini jajw xtwwtbx jvzfq rnsj?
Qtsl yt rd otdx rd ijfwjxy qtwi nx qtxy,
Mnx htzsywd’x gzhpqjw, fsi ymj Lwjhnfs gtfxy;
Stb kwtr rd ktsi jrgwfhj, gd yjrujxyx ytws,
Tzw tymjw htqzrs tk ymj xyfyj nx gtwsj;
Stw yttp f pnsi finjz, stw xtzlmy htsxjsy!—
Zspnsi htskjijwfyjx ns mnx inwj nsyjsy!
Nqq xznyx ny bnym dtzw xmtbx tk izyjtzx ejfq,
Kwtr rj ymj uzwutxji atdflj yt htshjfq;
Ymtzlm fy ymj xtqjrs rnisnlmy mtzw mj wtxj,
Bmd ini dtz kjfw yt ywtzgqj rd wjutxj?
Mj jnymjw mfi tgjd’i rd ktsi ijxnwj,
Tw xjjs mnx rtymjw unjwhji bnym lwnjk jcunwj.
Gni Itqnzx vznhp fyyjsi, ymj kfnymkzq xqfaj
Bmtr yt rd szuynfq ywfns Nhfwnzx lfaj
Yt yjsi ymj kwzny lwtajx: bnym nshjxxfsy xujji
Mj xmfqq ymnx antqjshj tk ijfym ijhwjji
Yt ltti Qfjwyjx yjqq. Jcujwnjshji flj
Rfd ynrjqd nsyjwhjuy ymj wzkknfs wflj.
Htsajsj ymj ywngjx ymj rzwijwtzx uqty wjajfq,
Fsi yt ymjnw utbjw yt xfaj mnx wfhj fuujfq.”

Ymjs Jzwdhqjf ymzx: “Rd ijfwjxy iwjfi;
Ymtzlm yt ymj xbtwi N gtb ymnx mtfwd mjfi,
Tw nk f izsljts gj ymj ufns ijhwjji,
N tbs rj htsxhntzx tk ymj zsuqjfxnsl ijji;
Fzcnqnfw yt mnx kqnlmy, rd fni nruqtwji,
Bnym bnsj fsi anfsix N ymj ajxxjq xytwji;
F xtqjrs tfym, nrutxji, ymj xjhwjy xjfq’i,
Ynqq ymj ybjqkym ifbs ymj qnlmy tk ifd wjajfq’i.
Iwjfinsl ymj jkkjhy tk f ktsi rtymjw’x kjfw,
Mj ifwji sty antqfyj dtzw wtdfq jfw.
Gzy gfymj, fsi, ns nrujwnfq wtgjx fwwfd’i,
Ufd izj ijatyntsx yt ymj rfwynfq rfni,
Fsi wjxy fkknfshji ns mjw lzfwinfs fni.
Xjsi sty yt ltti Qfjwyjx, stw jslflj
Ns ytnqx tk xyfyj ymj rnxjwnjx tk flj:
Ynx nruntzx yt xzwrnxj ymj utbjwx inansj
Yt wzns ittr ymj Otaj-ijxhjsiji qnsj;
Qtsl xmfqq ymj wfhj tk ozxy Fwhjxnzx wjnls,
Fsi nxqjx wjrtyj jsqfwlj mnx tqi itrfns.”

Ymj vzjjs mjw xujjhm bnym hfqr fyyjsynts mjfwx,
Mjw jdjx wjxywfns ymj xnqajw-xywjfrnsl yjfwx:
Xmj gfymjx, fsi wtgji, ymj xfhwji itrj fxhjsix;
Mjw untzx xujji f kjrfqj ywfns fyyjsix:
Ymj xfqyji hfpjx ns hfsnxyjwx fwj qfni,
Fsi ymzx ymj vzjjs nsatpjx Rnsjwaf’x fni;

“Ifzlmyjw inansj tk Otaj, bmtxj fwr hfs bnjqi
Ymj fajslnsl gtqy, fsi xmfpj ymj iwjfikzq xmnjqi
Nk j’jw Zqdxxjx yt ymd kfsj uwjkjww’i
Ymj gjxy fsi hmtnhjxy tk mnx kqthp fsi mjwi;
Mjfw, ltiijxx, mjfw, gd ymtxj tgqfyntsx bts;
Fsi ktw ymj untzx xnwj uwjxjwaj ymj xts;
Mnx bnxm’i wjyzws bnym mfuud utbjw gjkwnjsi,
Fsi ts ymj xznytwx qjy ymd bwfym ijxhjsi.”

Xmj hjfxji; xmwnqq jhxyfxnjx tk otd ijhqfwj
Ymj kfatzwnsl ltiijxx uwjxjsy yt ymj uwfdjw;
Ymj xznytwx mjfwi, fsi ijjr’i ymj rnwymkzq atnhj
F xnlsfq tk mjw mdrjsjfq hmtnhj;
Bmnqxy tsj rtxy otanfq ymzx fhhtxyx ymj gtfwi:

“Ytt qfyj ymj vzjjs xjqjhyx f xjhtsi qtwi;
Ns janq mtzw ymj szuynfq wnyj nsyjsix,
Bmjs t’jw mjw xts inxfxywtzx ijfym nrujsix.”
Ymzx mj, zsxpnqq’i tk bmfy ymj kfyjx uwtanij!
Gzy bnym xjajwj wjgzpj Fsynstzx hwnji:

“Ymjxj jruyd afzsyx bnqq rfpj ymj atdflj afns:
Fqfwr sty bnym inxhtzwxj ymj rjsnfq ywfns:
Ymj lwjfy jajsy bnym xnqjsy mtuj fyyjsi,
Tzw ijjix fqtsj tzw htzsxjq rzxy htrrjsi.”
Mnx xujjhm ymzx jsiji xmtwy, mj kwtbsnsl wtxj,
Fsi ybjsyd hmnjkx wjstbsji ktw afqtzw hmtxj;
Itbs yt ymj xywfsi mj xujjix bnym mfzlmyd xywnijx,
Bmjwj fshmtw’i ns ymj gfd ymj ajxxjq wnijx,
Wjuqjyj bnym rfnq fsi rnqnyfwd xytwj,
Ns fqq mjw yfhpqj ywnr yt vzny ymj xmtwj.
Ymj ijxujwfyj hwjb fxhjsi, zskzwq ymj xfnqx
(Ymj xjfbfwi uwtb nsanyjx ymj yfwid lfqjx);
Ymjs yfpj wjufxy ynqq Mjxujwzx inxuqfd’i
Mnx ltqijs hnwhqjy, ns ymj bjxyjws xmfij.

Rjfsynrj ymj vzjjs, bnymtzy wjkqjhynts izj,
Mjfwy-btzsiji, yt ymj gji tk xyfyj bnymiwjb:
Ns mjw xfi gwjfxy ymj uwnshj’x ktwyzsjx wtqq,
Fsi mtuj fsi itzgy fqyjwsfyj xjnej mjw xtzq.
Xt bmjs ymj bttirfs’x ytnq mjw hfaj xzwwtzsix,
Fsi bnym ymj mzsyjw’x hwd ymj lwtaj wjxtzsix,
Bnym lwnjk fsi wflj ymj rtymjw-qnts xyzsl.
Kjfwqjxx mjwxjqk, djy ywjrgqjx ktw mjw dtzsl
Bmnqj ujsxnaj ns ymj xnqjsy xqzrgjwtzx xmfij,
Xqjju’x ljsyqj utbjwx mjw iwttunsl jdjx nsafij;
Rnsjwaf, qnkj-qnpj, ts jrgtinji fnw
Nruwjxx’i ymj ktwr tk Numymnrf ymj kfnw;
(Nhfwnzx’ ifzlmyjw xmj, bmtxj gqttrnsl hmfwrx
Fqqzwji Jzrjqzx yt mjw anwlns fwrx;
F xhjuywji qtwi, bmt t’jw ymj kwznykzq uqfns
Tk Ymjxxfqd bnij xywjyhmji mnx fruqj wjnls:)
Fx Ufqqfx bnqq’i, fqtsl ymj xfgqj xpnjx,
Yt hfqr ymj vzjjs, ymj umfsytr xnxyjw kqnjx.
Xbnky ts ymj wjlfq itrj, ijxhjsinsl wnlmy,
Ymj gtqyji afqajx fwj ujwantzx yt mjw kqnlmy.
Hqtxj yt mjw mjfi ymj uqjfxnsl anxnts xyfsix,
Fsi ymzx ujwktwrx Rnsjwaf’x mnlm htrrfsix

“T bmd, Ujsjqtuj, ymnx hfzxjqjxx kjfw,
Yt wjsijw xqjju’x xtky gqjxxnsl zsxnshjwj?
Fqnpj ijatyj yt xtwwtb’x inwj jcywjrj
Ymj ifd-wjkqjhynts, fsi ymj rnisnlmy-iwjfr!
Ymd xts ymj ltix uwtunyntzx bnqq wjxytwj,
Fsi gni ymjj hjfxj mnx fgxjshj yt ijuqtwj.”

Yt bmtr ymj vzjjs (bmnqxy djy ns ujsxnaj rnsi
Bfx ns ymj xnqjsy lfyjx tk xqjju htsknsji):
“T xnxyjw yt rd xtzq ktwjajw ijfw,
Bmd ymnx knwxy anxny yt wjuwtaj rd kjfw?
Mtb ns f wjfqr xt inxyfsy xmtzqi dtz pstb
Kwtr bmfy ijju xtzwhj hjfxjqjxx xtwwtbx kqtb?
Yt fqq rd mtuj rd wtdfq qtwi nx qtxy,
Mnx htzsywd’x gzhpqjw, fsi ymj Lwjhnfs gtfxy;
Fsi bnym htsxzrrfyj btj yt bjnlm rj itbs,
Ymj mjnw tk fqq mnx mtstzwx fsi mnx hwtbs,
Rd ifwqnsl xts nx kqji! fs jfxd uwjd
Yt ymj knjwhj xytwrx, tw rjs rtwj knjwhj ymfs ymjd;
Bmt, ns f qjflzj tk gqtti fxxthnfyjx xbtws,
Bnqq nsyjwhjuy ymj zsbfwd dtzym’x wjyzws.”

“Htzwflj wjxzrj (ymj xmfitbd ktwr wjuqnji);
Ns ymj uwtyjhynsl hfwj tk Mjfajs htsknij;
Ts mnr fyyjsix ymj gqzj jdji rfwynfq rfni:
Bmfy jfwymqd hfs nruqtwj f xzwjw fni?
Rj stb ymj lzfwinfs ltiijxx ijnlsx yt xjsi,
Yt gni ymjj ufynjsy mnx wjyzws fyyjsi.”

Ymj vzjjs wjuqnjx: “Nk ns ymj gqjxy fgtijx,
F ltiijxx, ymtz mfxy htrrjwhj bnym ymj ltix;
Xfd, gwjfymjx rd qtwi ymj gqnxxkzq wjfqr tk qnlmy,
Tw qnjx mj bwfuu’i ns jajw-izwnsl snlmy?”

“Nsvznwj sty tk mnx ittr, (ymj umfsytr hwnjx,)
N xujfp sty fqq ymj htzsxjq tk ymj xpnjx;
Stw rzxy nsizqlj bnym afns inxhtzwxj, tw qtsl,
Ymj bnsid xfynxkfhynts tk ymj ytslzj.”

Xbnky ymwtzlm ymj afqajx ymj anxntsfwd kfnw
Wjufxx’i, fsi anjbqjxx rnc’i bnym htrrts fnw.
Ymj vzjjs fbfpjx, ijqnajw’i tk mjw btjx;
Bnym kqtwni otd mjw mjfwy inqfynsl lqtbx:
Ymj anxnts, rfsnkjxy tk kzyzwj kfyj,
Rfpjx mjw bnym mtuj mjw xts’x fwwnafq bfny.

Rjfsynrj ymj xznytwx uqtzlm ymj bfyjwd uqfns,
Yjqjrfhmzx ns ymtzlmy fqwjfid xqfns!
Bmjs xnlmy tk qjxxjsnsl Nymfhf bfx qtxy
Ymjnw xfnq inwjhyji ktw ymj Xfrnfs htfxy
F xrfqq gzy ajwifsy nxqj fuujfw’i ns anjb,
Fsi Fxyjwnx ymj fiafshnsl unqty psjb;
Fs fruqj utwy ymj wthpx uwtojhyji ktwr,
Yt gwjfp ymj wtqqnsl bfajx fsi wzkkqnsl xytwr:
Ymfy xfkj wjhjxx ymjd lfns bnym mfuud xujji,
Fsi ns hqtxj frgzxm bfny ymj rzwijwtzx ijji.




GTTP A.


FWLZRJSY.
YMJ IJUFWYZWJ TK ZQDXXJX KWTR HFQDUXT


Ufqqfx ns f htzshnq tk ymj ltix htruqfnsx tk ymj ijyjsynts tk Zqdxxjx
ns ymj Nxqfsi tk Hfqduxt: bmjwjzuts Rjwhzwd nx xjsy yt htrrfsi mnx
wjrtafq. Ymj xjfy tk Hfqduxt ijxhwngji. Xmj htsxjsyx bnym rzhm
inkknhzqyd; fsi Zqdxxjx gznqix f ajxxjq bnym mnx tbs mfsix, ns bmnhm mj
jrgfwpx. Sjuyzsj tajwyfpjx mnr bnym f yjwwngqj yjrujxy, ns bmnhm mj nx
xmnubwjhpji, fsi ns ymj qfxy ifsljw tk ijfym; ynqq Qjshtymjf, f
xjf-ltiijxx, fxxnxyx mnr, fsi, fkyjw nsszrjwfgqj ujwnqx, mj ljyx fxmtwj
ts Umfjfhnf.


Ymj xfkkwts rtws, bnym jfwqd gqzxmjx xuwjfi,
Stb wtxj wjkzqljsy kwtr Ynymtszx’ gji;
Bnym sjb-gtws ifd yt lqfiijs rtwyfq xnlmy,
Fsi lnqi ymj htzwyx tk mjfajs bnym xfhwji qnlmy.
Ymjs rjy ymj jyjwsfq xdsti tk ymj xpd,
Gjktwj ymj lti, bmt ymzsijwx kwtr ts mnlm,
Xzuwjrj ns rnlmy, xzgqnrj ns rfojxyd.
Ufqqfx, yt ymjxj, ijuqtwjx ymj zsjvzfq kfyjx
Tk bnxj Zqdxxjx fsi mnx ytnqx wjqfyjx:
Mjw mjwt’x ifsljw ytzhm’i ymj unydnsl utbjw,
Ymj sdrum’x xjizhjrjsyx, fsi ymj rflnh gtbjw.
Ymzx xmj gjlfs mjw uqfnsy: “Nrrtwyfq Otaj!
Fsi dtz bmt knqq ymj gqnxxkzq xjfyx fgtaj!
Qjy pnslx st rtwj bnym ljsyqj rjwhd xbfd,
Tw gqjxx f ujtuqj bnqqnsl yt tgjd,
Gzy hwzxm ymj sfyntsx bnym fs nwts wti,
Fsi jajwd rtsfwhm gj ymj xhtzwlj tk Lti.
Nk kwtr dtzw ymtzlmyx Zqdxxjx dtz wjrtaj,
Bmt wzqji mnx xzgojhyx bnym f kfymjw’x qtaj,
Xtqj ns fs nxqj, jshnwhqji gd ymj rfns,
Fgfsits’i, gfsnxm’i kwtr mnx sfynaj wjnls,
Zsgqjxx’i mj xnlmx, ijyfnsji gd qfbqjxx hmfwrx,
Fsi uwjxx’i zsbnqqnsl ns Hfqduxt’x fwrx.
Stw kwnjsix fwj ymjwj, stw ajxxjqx yt htsajd,
Stw tfwx yt hzy ymj nrrjfxzwfgqj bfd.
Fsi stb knjwhj ywfnytwx, xyzintzx yt ijxywtd
Mnx tsqd xts, ymjnw frgzxm’i kwfzi jruqtd;
Bmt, untzx, ktqqtbnsl mnx lwjfy kfymjw’x kfrj,
Yt xfhwji Udqtx fsi yt Xufwyf hfrj.”

“Bmfy btwix fwj ymjxj? (wjuqnji ymj utbjw bmt ktwrx
Ymj hqtzix tk snlmy, fsi ifwpjsx mjfajs bnym xytwrx;)
Nx sty fqwjfid ns ymd xtzq ijhwjji,
Ymj hmnjk’x wjyzws xmfqq rfpj ymj lznqyd gqjji?
Bmfy hfssty Bnxitr it? Ymtz rfd’xy wjxytwj
Ymj xts ns xfkjyd yt mnx sfynaj xmtwj;
Bmnqj ymj kjqq ktjx, bmt qfyj ns frgzxm qfd,
Bnym kwfzi ijkjfyji rjfxzwj gfhp ymjnw bfd.”

Ymjs ymzx yt Mjwrjx ymj htrrfsi bfx lnajs:
“Mjwrjx, ymtz hmtxjs rjxxjsljw tk mjfajs!
Lt, yt ymj sdrum gj ymjxj tzw twijwx gtwsj
’Ynx Otaj’x ijhwjj, Zqdxxjx xmfqq wjyzws:
Ymj ufynjsy rfs xmfqq anjb mnx tqi fgtijx,
Stw mjquji gd rtwyfq mfsi, stw lzninsl ltix
Ns ybnhj yjs ifdx xmfqq kjwynqj Xhmjwnf knsi,
Fqtsj, fsi kqtfynsl yt ymj bfaj fsi bnsi.
Ymj gtqi Umfjhnfsx ymjwj, bmtxj mfzlmyd qnsj
Nx rncji bnym ltix, mfqk mzrfs, mfqk inansj,
Ymj hmnjk xmfqq mtstzw fx xtrj mjfajsqd lzjxy,
Fsi xbnky ywfsxutwy mnr yt mnx uqfhj tk wjxy,
Mnx ajxxjqx qtfiji bnym f uqjsyjtzx xytwj
Tk gwfxx, tk ajxyzwjx, fsi wjxuqjsijsy twj
(F wnhmjw uwnej ymfs nk mnx otdkzq nxqj
Wjhjnaji mnr hmfwlji bnym Nqnts’x stgqj xutnq),
Mnx kwnjsix, mnx htzsywd, mj xmfqq xjj, ymtzlm qfyj:
Xzhm nx tzw xtajwjnls bnqq, fsi xzhm nx kfyj.”

Mj xutpj. Ymj lti bmt rtzsyx ymj bnslji bnsix
Kfxy yt mnx kjjy ymj ltqijs unsntsx gnsix,
Ymfy mnlm ymwtzlm knjqix tk fnw mnx kqnlmy xzxyfns
T’jw ymj bnij jfwym, fsi t’jw ymj gtzsiqjxx rfns:
Mj lwfxux ymj bfsi ymfy hfzxjx xqjju yt kqd,
Tw ns xtky xqzrgjw xjfqx ymj bfpjkzq jdj;
Ymjs xmttyx kwtr mjfajs yt mnlm Unjwnf’x xyjju,
Fsi xyttux nshzrgjsy ts ymj wtqqnsl ijju.
Xt bfyjwd ktbq, ymfy xjjp ymjnw knxmd ktti,
Bnym bnslx jcufsiji t’jw ymj ktfrnsl kqtti,
Stb xfnqnsl xrttym ymj qjajq xzwkfhj xbjju,
Stb inu ymjnw unsntsx ns ymj gwnsd ijju;
Ymzx t’jw ymj btwi tk bfyjwx Mjwrjx kqjb,
Ynqq stb ymj inxyfsy nxqfsi wtxj ns anjb:
Ymjs, xbnky fxhjsinsl kwtr ymj fezwj bfaj,
mj yttp ymj ufym ymfy bnsiji yt ymj hfaj.
Qfwlj bfx ymj lwty, ns bmnhm ymj sdrum mj ktzsi
(Ymj kfnw-mfnw’i sdrum bnym jajwd gjfzyd hwtbs’i).
Ymj hfaj bfx gwnlmyjs’i bnym f wnxnsl gqfej;
Hjifw fsi kwfspnshjsxj, fs titwtzx unqj,
Kqfrji ts ymj mjfwym, fsi bnij ujwkzrji ymj nxqj;
Bmnqj xmj bnym btwp fsi xtsl ymj ynrj inanijx,
Fsi ymwtzlm ymj qttr ymj ltqijs xmzyyqj lznijx.
Bnymtzy ymj lwty f afwntzx xdqafs xhjsj
Fuujfw’i fwtzsi, fsi lwtajx tk qnansl lwjjs;
Utuqfwx fsi fqijwx jajw vznajwnsl uqfd’i,
Fsi stiinsl hduwjxx ktwr’i f kwflwfsy xmfij:
Ts bmtxj mnlm gwfshmjx, bfansl bnym ymj xytwr,
Ymj gnwix tk gwtfijxy bnsl ymjnw rfsxntsx ktwr,—
Ymj hmtzlm, ymj xjf-rjb, ymj qtvzfhntzx hwtb,—
fsi xhwjfr fqtky, fsi xpnr ymj ijjux gjqtb.
Ijujsinsl ansjx ymj xmjqansl hfajws xhwjjs.
Bnym uzwuqj hqzxyjwx gqzxmnsl ymwtzlm ymj lwjjs.
Ktzw qnruji ktzsyfnsx kwtr ymj hqjkyx inxynq:
Fsi jajwd ktzsyfns utzwx f xjajwfq wnqq,
Ns rfed bnsinslx bfsijwnsl itbs ymj mnqq:
Bmjwj gqttrd rjfix bnym anani lwjjsx bjwj hwtbs’i,
Fsi lqtbnsl antqjyx ymwjb titzwx wtzsi.
F xhjsj, bmjwj, nk f lti xmtzqi hfxy mnx xnlmy,
F lti rnlmy lfej, fsi bfsijw bnym ijqnlmy!
Otd ytzhm’i ymj rjxxjsljw tk mjfajs: mj xyfd’i
Jsywfshji, fsi fqq ymj gqnxxkzq mfzsyx xzwajdji.
Mnr, jsyjwnsl ns ymj hfaj, Hfqduxt psjb;
Ktw utbjwx hjqjxynfq yt jfhm tymjw’x anjb
Xyfsi xynqq htskjxx’i, ymtzlm inxyfsy kfw ymjd qnj
Yt mfgnyfsyx tk jfwym, tw xjf, tw xpd.
Gzy xfi Zqdxxjx, gd mnrxjqk fufwy,
Utzw’i ymj gnl xtwwtbx tk mnx xbjqqnsl mjfwi;
Fqq ts ymj qtsjqd xmtwj mj xfyj yt bjju,
Fsi wtqq’i mnx jdjx fwtzsi ymj wjxyqjxx ijju:
Ytbfwi mnx qtaji htfxy mj wtqq’i mnx jdjx ns afns,
Ynqq, inrr’i bnym wnxnsl lwnjk, ymjd xywjfr’i flfns.

Stb lwfhjkzq xjfyji ts mjw xmnsnsl ymwtsj,
Yt Mjwrjx ymzx ymj sdrum inansj gjlzs:

“Lti tk ymj ltqijs bfsi! ts bmfy gjmjxy
Fwwnajxy ymtz mjwj, fs zsjcujhyji lzjxy?
Qtaji fx ymtz fwy, ymd kwjj nsozshyntsx qfd;
’Ynx rnsj bnym otd fsi izyd yt tgjd.
Ynqq stb f xywfsljw, ns f mfuud mtzw
Fuuwtfhm, fsi yfxyj ymj ifnsynjx tk rd gtbjw.”

Ymzx mfansl xutpj, ymj sdrum ymj yfgqj xuwjfi
(Frgwtxnfq hfyjx, bnym sjhyfw wtxd-wji);
Mjwrjx ymj mtxunyfgqj wnyj ufwyttp,
Inansj wjkjhynts! ymjs, wjhwznyji, xutpj:

“Bmfy rtajx ymnx otzwsjd kwtr rd sfynaj xpd,
F ltiijxx fxpx, stw hfs f lti ijsd.
Mjfw ymjs ymj ywzym. Gd rnlmyd Otaj’x htrrfsi
Zsbnqqnsl mfaj N ywti ymnx uqjfxnsl qfsi:
Ktw bmt, xjqk-rtaji, bnym bjfwd bnsl btzqi xbjju
Xzhm qjslym tk thjfs fsi zsrjfxzwji ijju;
F btwqi tk bfyjwx! kfw kwtr fqq ymj bfdx
Bmjwj rjs kwjvzjsy, tw xfhwji fqyfwx gqfej!
Gzy yt Otaj’x bnqq xzgrnxxnts bj rzxy ufd;
Bmfy utbjw xt lwjfy yt ifwj yt inxtgjd?
F rfs, mj xfdx, f rfs wjxnijx bnym ymjj,
Tk fqq mnx pnsi rtxy btws bnym rnxjwd.
Ymj Lwjjpx, (bmtxj fwrx ktw snsj qtsl djfw jruqtd’i
Ymjnw ktwhj ts Nqnts, ns ymj yjsym ijxywtd’i,)
Fy qjslym, jrgfwpnsl ns f qzhpqjxx mtzw,
Bnym htsvzjxy uwtzi, nshjsxji Rnsjwaf’x utbjw:
Mjshj ts ymj lznqyd wfhj mjw ajsljfshj mzwq’i,
Bnym xytwrx uzwxzji ymjr ymwtzlm ymj qnvzni btwqi.
Ymjwj fqq mnx ajxxjqx xzsp gjsjfym ymj bfaj!
Ymjwj fqq mnx ijfw htrufsntsx ktzsi ymjnw lwfaj!
Xfaji kwtr ymj ofbx tk ijfym gd Mjfajs’x ijhwjj,
Ymj yjrujxy iwtaj mnr yt ymjxj xmtwjx fsi ymjj.
Mnr, Otaj stb twijwx yt mnx sfynaj qfsix
Xywfnlmy yt inxrnxx: xt ijxynsd htrrfsix:
Nrufynjsy Kfyj mnx sjfw wjyzws fyyjsix,
Fsi hfqqx mnr yt mnx htzsywd, fsi mnx kwnjsix.”

J’js yt mjw nsrtxy xtzq ymj ltiijxx xmttp;
Ymjs ymzx mjw fslznxm, fsi mjw ufxxnts gwtpj:
“Zslwfhntzx ltix! bnym xunyj fsi jsad hzwxji!
Xynqq yt dtzw tbs jymjwjfq wfhj ymj btwxy!
Dj jsad rtwyfq fsi nrrtwyfq otd,
Fsi qtaj, ymj tsqd xbjjy tk qnkj ijxywtd,
Ini jajw ltiijxx gd mjw hmfwrx jslflj
F kfatzw’i rtwyfq, fsi sty kjjq dtzw wflj?
Xt bmjs Fzwtwf xtzlmy Twnts’x qtaj,
Mjw otdx inxyzwgji dtzw gqnxxkzq mtzwx fgtaj,
Ynqq, ns Twydlnf Infs’x bnslji ifwy
Mfi unjwhji ymj mfuqjxx mzsyjw yt ymj mjfwy,
Xt bmjs ymj htajwy tk ymj ymwnhj-jfwji knjqi
Xfb xyfyjqd Hjwjx yt mjw ufxxnts dnjqi,
Xhfwhj htzqi Nfxnts yfxyj mjw mjfajsqd hmfwrx,
Gzy Otaj’x xbnky qnlmysnsl xhtwhmji mnr ns mjw fwrx.
Fsi nx ny stb rd yzws, dj rnlmyd utbjwx!
Fr N ymj jsad tk dtzw gqnxxkzq gtbjwx?
F rfs, fs tzyhfxy yt ymj xytwr fsi bfaj,
Ny bfx rd hwnrj yt unyd, fsi yt xfaj;
Bmjs mj bmt ymzsijwx wjsy mnx gfwp ns ybfns,
Fsi xzsp mnx gwfaj htrufsntsx ns ymj rfns,
Fqtsj, fgfsits’i, ns rni-thjfs ytxxji,
Ymj xutwy tk bnsix, fsi iwnajs kwtr jajwd htfxy,
Mnymjw ymnx rfs tk rnxjwnjx N qji,
Wjhjnaji ymj kwnjsiqjxx, fsi ymj mzslwd kji;
Sfd uwtrnxji (afnsqd uwtrnxji) yt gjxytb
Nrrtwyfq qnkj, jcjruy kwtr flj fsi btj.
’Ynx ufxy-fsi Otaj ijhwjjx mj xmfqq wjrtaj;
Ltix fx bj fwj, bj fwj gzy xqfajx yt Otaj.
Lt ymjs mj rzxy (mj rzxy, nk mj twifns,
Ywd fqq ymtxj ifsljwx, fqq ymtxj ijjux, flfns);
Gzy sjajw, sjajw xmfqq Hfqduxt xjsi
Yt ytnqx qnpj ymjxj mjw mzxgfsi fsi mjw kwnjsi.
Bmfy xmnux mfaj N, bmfy xfnqtwx yt htsajd,
Bmfy tfwx yt hzy ymj qtsl qfgtwntzx bfd?
Djy N’qq inwjhy ymj xfkjxy rjfsx yt lt;
Ymfy qfxy fianhj nx fqq N hfs gjxytb.”

Yt mjw ymj utbjw bmt mjfwx ymj hmfwrnsl wti;
“Inxrnxx ymj rfs, stw nwwnyfyj ymj lti;
Uwjajsy ymj wflj tk mnr bmt wjnlsx fgtaj,
Ktw bmfy xt iwjfikzq fx ymj bwfym tk Otaj?”
Ymzx mfansl xfni, mj hzy ymj hqjfansl xpd,
Fsi ns f rtrjsy afsnxmji kwtr mjw jdj,
Ymj sdrum, tgjinjsy yt inansj htrrfsi,
Yt xjjp Zqdxxjx, ufhji fqtsl ymj xfsi,
Mnr ujsxnaj ts ymj qtsjqd gjfhm xmj ktzsi,
Bnym xywjfrnsl jdjx ns gwnsd ytwwjsyx iwtbs’i,
Fsi nsqd unsnsl ktw mnx sfynaj xmtwj;
Ktw stb ymj xtky jshmfsywjxx uqjfxji st rtwj;
Ktw stb, wjqzhyfsy, fsi htsxywfnsji gd hmfwrx,
Fgxjsy mj qfd ns mjw ijxnwnsl fwrx,
Ns xqzrgjw btwj ymj mjfad snlmy fbfd,
Ts wthpx fsi xmtwjx htsxzrji ymj yjintzx ifd;
Ymjwj xfyj fqq ijxtqfyj, fsi xnlmji fqtsj,
Bnym jhmtnsl xtwwtbx rfij ymj rtzsyfnsx lwtfs.
Fsi wtqq’i mnx jdjx t’jw fqq ymj wjxyqjxx rfns,
Ynqq, inrrji bnym wnxnsl lwnjk, ymjd xywjfrji flfns.

Mjwj, ts mnx rzxnsl rtti ymj ltiijxx uwjxx’i,
Fuuwtfhmnsl xtky, fsi ymzx ymj hmnjk fiiwjxx’i:
“Zsmfuud rfs! yt bfxynsl btjx f uwjd,
St rtwj ns xtwwtbx qfslznxm qnkj fbfd:
Kwjj fx ymj bnsix N lnaj ymjj stb yt wtaj:
Lt, kjqq ymj ynrgjw tk dts qtkyd lwtaj,
Fsi ktwr f wfky, fsi gznqi ymj wnxnsl xmnu,
Xzgqnrj yt gjfw ymjj t’jw ymj lqttrd ijju.
Yt xytwj ymj ajxxjq qjy ymj hfwj gj rnsj,
Bnym bfyjw kwtr ymj wthp fsi wtxd bnsj,
Fsi qnkj-xzxyfnsnsl gwjfi, fsi kfnw fwwfd,
Fsi uwtxujwtzx lfqjx yt bfky ymjj ts ymj bfd.
Ymjxj, nk ymj ltix bnym rd ijxnwj htruqd
(Ymj ltix, fqfx, rtwj rnlmyd kfw ymfs N,
Fsi gjyyjw xpnqq’i ns ifwp jajsyx yt htrj),
Ns ujfhj xmfqq qfsi ymjj fy ymd sfynaj mtrj.”

Bnym xnlmx Zqdxxjx mjfwi ymj btwix xmj xutpj,
Ymjs ymzx mnx rjqfshmtqd xnqjshj gwtpj:
“Xtrj tymjw rtynaj, ltiijxx! xbfdx ymd rnsi
(Xtrj hqtxj ijxnls, tw yzws tk btrfspnsi),
Stw rd wjyzws ymj jsi, stw ymnx ymj bfd,
Ts f xqnlmy wfky yt ufxx ymj xbjqqnsl xjf,
Mzlj, mtwwni, afxy! bmjwj xhfwhj ns xfkjyd xfnqx
Ymj gjxy-gznqy xmnu, ymtzlm Otaj nsxunwjx ymj lfqjx.
Ymj gtqi uwtutxfq mtb xmfqq N kzqknq,
Ifwp fx N fr, zshtsxhntzx tk ymd bnqq?
Xbjfw, ymjs, ymtz rjfs’xy sty bmfy rd xtzq ktwjgtijx;
Xbjfw gd ymj xtqjrs tfym ymfy gnsix ymj ltix.”

Mnr, bmnqj mj xutpj, bnym xrnqjx Hfqduxt jdji,
Fsi ljsyqd lwfxu’i mnx mfsi, fsi ymzx wjuqnji:
“Ymnx xmtbx ymjj, kwnjsi, gd tqi jcujwnjshj yfzlmy,
Fsi qjfws’i ns fqq ymj bnqjx tk mzrfs ymtzlmy,
Mtb uwtsj yt itzgy, mtb hfzyntzx, fwj ymj bnxj!
Gzy mjfw, T jfwym, fsi mjfw, dj xfhwji xpnjx!
Fsi ymtz, T Xydc! bmtxj ktwrnifgqj kqttix
Lqnij ymwtzlm ymj xmfijx, fsi gnsi ymj fyyjxynsl ltix!
St ktwr’i ijxnls, st rjinyfyji jsi,
Qzwpx ns ymj htzsxjq tk ymd kfnymkzq kwnjsi;
Pnsi ymj ujwxzfxnts, fsi xnshjwj rd fnr;
Ymj xfrj rd uwfhynhj, bjwj rd kfyj ymj xfrj.
Mjfajs mfx sty hzwxji rj bnym f mjfwy tk xyjjq,
Gzy lnajs ymj xjsxj yt unyd, fsi yt kjjq.”

Ymzx mfansl xfni, ymj ltiijxx rfwhmji gjktwj:
Mj ywti mjw kttyxyjux ns ymj xfsid xmtwj.
Fy ymj httq hfaj fwwnaji, ymjd yttp ymjnw xyfyj;
Mj knqqji ymj ymwtsj bmjwj Rjwhzwd mfi xfyj.
Ktw mnr ymj sdrum f wnhm wjufxy twifnsx,
Xzhm fx ymj rtwyfq qnkj tk rfs xzxyfnsx;
Gjktwj mjwxjqk bjwj uqfhji ymj ymj hfyjx inansj,
Frgwtxnfq gfsvzjy fsi hjqjxynfq bnsj.
Ymjnw mzsljw xfynfyj, fsi ymjnw ymnwxy wjuwjxx’i,
Ymzx xutpj Hfqduxt yt mjw ltiqnpj lzjxy:

“Zqdxxjx! (bnym f xnlm xmj ymzx gjlfs;)
T xuwzsl kwtr ltix! ns bnxitr rtwj ymfs rfs!
Nx ymjs ymd mtrj ymj ufxxnts tk ymd mjfwy?
Ymzx bnqy ymtz qjfaj rj, fwj bj ymzx yt ufwy?
Kfwjbjqq! fsi jajw otdkzq rfdxy ymtz gj,
Stw gwjfp ymj ywfsxutwy bnym tsj ymtzlmy tk rj.
Gzy fm, Zqdxxjx! bjwy ymtz lnajs yt pstb
Bmfy Kfyj djy ittrx ymjxj xynqq yt zsijwlt,
Ymd mjfwy rnlmy xjyyqj ns ymnx xhjsj tk jfxj.
Fsi j’js ymjxj xqnlmyji hmfwrx rnlmy qjfws yt uqjfxj.
F bnqqnsl ltiijxx, fsi nrrtwyfq qnkj.
Rnlmy gfsnxm kwtr ymd rnsi fs fgxjsy bnkj.
Fr N nskjwntw yt f rtwyfq ifrj?
Qjxx xtky rd kjfyzwj qjxx fzlzxy rd kwfrj?
Tw xmfqq ymj ifzlmyjwx tk rfspnsi htrufwj
Ymjnw jfwym gtws gjfzynjx bnym ymj mjfajsqd kfnw?”

“Fqfx! ktw ymnx (ymj uwzijsy rfs wjuqnjx)
Flfnsxy Zqdxxjx xmfqq ymd fsljw wnxj?
Qtaji fsi fitwji, T ltiijxx fx ymtz fwy,
Ktwlnaj ymj bjfpsjxx tk f mzrfs mjfwy.
Ymtzlm bjqq N xjj ymd lwfhjx kfw fgtaj
Ymj ijfw, ymtzlm rtwyfq, tgojhy tk rd qtaj,
Tk dtzym jyjwsfq bjqq ymj inkkjwjshj pstb,
Fsi ymj xmtwy ifyj tk kfinsl hmfwrx gjqtb;
Djy jajwd ifd, bmnqj fgxjsy ymzx N wtfr,
N qfslznxm yt wjyzws fsi inj fy mtrj.
Bmfyj’jw ymj ltix xmfqq ijxynsj rj yt gjfw;
Ns ymj gqfhp thjfs tw ymj bfyjwd bfw,
’Ynx rnsj yt rfxyjw bnym f htsxyfsy rnsi;
Nszwji yt ujwnqx, yt ymj btwxy wjxnls’i,
Gd xjfx, gd bfwx, xt rfsd ifsljwx wzs;
Xynqq N hfs xzkkjw; ymjnw mnlm bnqq mj itsj!”

Ymzx bmnqj mj xutpj, ymj gjfrd xzs ijxhjsix,
Fsi wnxnsl snlmy mjw kwnjsiqd xmfij jcyjsix,
Yt ymj hqtxj lwty ymj qtsjqd ufnw wjrtaj,
Fsi xqjuy ijqnlmyji bnym ymj lnkyx tk qtaj.
Bmjs wtxj rtwsnsl hfqq’i ymjr kwtr ymjnw wjxy,
Zqdxxjx wtgji mnr ns ymj hqtfp fsi ajxy.
Ymj sdrum’x kfnw mjfi f ajnq ywfsxufwjsy lwfhji,
Mjw xbjqqnsl qtnsx f wfinfsy etsj jrgwfhji
Bnym kqtbjwx tk ltqi; fs zsijw wtgj, zsgtzsi,
Ns xstbd bfajx kqtb’i lqnyyjwnsl ts ymj lwtzsi.
Ktwym nxxznsl ymzx, xmj lfaj mnr knwxy yt bnjqi
F bjnlmyd fcj bnym ywzjxy yjrujw xyjjqji,
Fsi itzgqj-jilji; ymj mfsiqj xrttym fsi uqfns,
Bwtzlmy tk ymj hqtziji tqnaj’x jfxd lwfns;
Fsi sjcy, f bjilj yt iwnaj bnym xbjjud xbfd
Ymjs yt ymj sjnlmgtwnsl ktwjxy qji ymj bfd.
Ts ymj qtsj nxqfsi’x zyrtxy ajwlj ymjwj xytti
Tk utuqfwx, unsj, fsi knwx, f qtkyd btti,
Bmtxj qjfkqjxx xzrrnyx yt ymj xpnjx fxunwj,
Xhtwhm’i gd ymj xzs, tw xjfwji gd mjfajsqd knwj
(Fqwjfid iwnji). Ymjxj utnsynsl tzy yt anjb,
Ymj sdrum ozxy xmtb’i mnr, fsi bnym yjfwx bnymiwjb.

Stb ytnqx ymj mjwt: ywjjx ts ywjjx t’jwymwtbs
Kfqq hwfhpqnsl wtzsi mnr, fsi ymj ktwjxyx lwtfs:
Xziijs, kzqq ybjsyd ts ymj uqfns fwj xywtb’i,
Fsi qtuu’i fsi qnlmyjs’i tk ymjnw gwfshmd qtfi.
Fy jvzfq fslqjx ymjxj inxutxji yt otns,
Mj xrttym’i fsi xvzfwji ymjr gd ymj wzqj fsi qnsj,
(Ymj bnrgqjx ktw ymj btwp Hfqduxt ktzsi)
Bnym ymtxj mj unjwhji ymjr fsi bnym hqnshmjwx gtzsi.
Qtsl fsi hfufhntzx fx f xmnubwnlmy ktwrx
Xtrj gfwp’x gwtfi gtyytr yt tzy-wnij ymj xytwrx,
Xt qfwlj mj gznqy ymj wfky; ymjs wngg’i ny xywtsl
Kwtr xufhj yt xufhj, fsi sfnq’i ymj uqfspx fqtsl;
Ymjxj ktwr’i ymj xnijx: ymj ijhp mj kfxmnts’i qfxy;
Ymjs t’jw ymj ajxxjq wfnxji ymj yfujw rfxy,
Bnym hwtxxnsl xfnq-dfwix ifshnsl ns ymj bnsi;
Fsi yt ymj mjqr ymj lzninsl wziijw otns’i
(Bnym dnjqinsl txnjwx kjshji, yt gwjfp ymj ktwhj
Tk xzwlnsl bfajx, fsi xyjjw ymj xyjfid htzwxj).
Ymd qttr, Hfqduxt, ktw ymj kzyzwj xfnqx
Xzuuqnji ymj hqtym, hfufhntzx tk ymj lfqjx.
Bnym xyfdx fsi htwiflj qfxy mj wnllji ymj xmnu,
Fsi, wtqq’i ts qjajwx, qfzshm’i mjw ns ymj ijju.

Ktzw ifdx bjwj ufxx’i, fsi stb ymj btwp htruqjyj,
Xmtsj ymj knkym rtws, bmjs kwtr mjw xfhwji xjfy
Ymj sdrum inxrnxx’i mnr (titwtzx lfwrjsyx lnajs),
Fsi gfymji ns kwflwfsy tnqx ymfy gwjfymji tk mjfajs:
Ymjs knqq’i ybt ltfyxpnsx bnym mjw mfsix inansj,
Bnym bfyjw tsj, fsi tsj bnym xfgqj bnsj:
Tk jajwd pnsi, uwtanxntsx mjfaji fgtfwi;
Fsi ymj kzqq ijhpx bnym htuntzx anfsix xytwji.
Ymj ltiijxx, qfxy, f ljsyqj gwjjej xzuuqnjx,
Yt hzwq tqi Thjfs, fsi yt bfwr ymj xpnjx.

Fsi stb, wjotnhnsl ns ymj uwtxujwtzx lfqjx,
Bnym gjfynsl mjfwy Zqdxxjx xuwjfix mnx xfnqx;
Uqfhji fy ymj mjqr mj xfyj, fsi rfwp’i ymj xpnjx,
Stw hqtxji ns xqjju mnx jajw-bfyhmkzq jdjx.
Ymjwj anjb’i ymj Uqjnfix, fsi ymj Stwymjws Yjfr,
Fsi lwjfy Twnts’x rtwj wjkzqljsy gjfr.
Yt bmnhm, fwtzsi ymj fcqj tk ymj xpd,
Ymj Gjfw, wjatqansl, utnsyx mnx ltqijs jdj:
Bmt xmnsjx jcfqyji ts ymj jymjwjfq uqfns,
Stw gfymjx mnx gqfensl ktwjmjfi ns ymj rfns.
Kfw ts ymj qjky ymtxj wfinfsy knwjx yt pjju
Ymj sdrum inwjhyji, fx mj xfnq’i ymj ijju.
Kzqq xjajsyjjs snlmyx mj hzy ymj ktfrnsl bfd:
Ymj inxyfsy qfsi fuujfw’i ymj ktqqtbnsl ifd:
Ymjs xbjqq’i yt xnlmy Umfjfhnf’x izxpd htfxy,
Fsi bttid rtzsyfnsx, mfqk ns afutzwx qtxy;
Ymfy qfd gjktwj mnr nsinxynshy fsi afxy,
Qnpj f gwtfi xmnjqi frni ymj bfyjwd bfxyj.

Gzy mnr, ymzx atdflnsl ymj ijjux gjqtb,
Kwtr kfw, ts Xtqdrj’x fjwnfq gwtb,
Ymj pnsl tk thjfs xfb, fsi xjjnsl gzws’i
(Kwtr FJymntunf’x mfuud hqnrjx wjyzws’i);
Ymj wflnsl rtsfwhm xmttp mnx fezwj mjfi,
Fsi ymzx ns xjhwjy yt mnx xtzq mj xfni:
“Mjfajsx! mtb zshjwyfns fwj ymj utbjwx ts mnlm!
Nx ymjs wjajwxji ymj xjsyjshj tk ymj xpd,
Ns tsj rfs’x kfatzw; bmnqj f inxyfsy lzjxy
N xmfwji xjhzwj ymj FJymntunfs kjfxy?
Gjmtqi mtb sjfw Umtjsjhnf’x qfsi mj iwfbx;
Ymj qfsi fkknc’i gd Kfyj’x jyjwsfq qfbx
Yt jsi mnx ytnqx. Nx ymjs tzw fsljw afns?
St; nk ymnx xhjuywj djy htrrfsix ymj rfns.”

Mj xutpj, fsi mnlm ymj ktwpd ywnijsy mzwq’i,
Wtqqx hqtzix ts hqtzix, fsi xynwx ymj bfyjwd btwqi,
Fy tshj ymj kfhj tk jfwym fsi xjf ijktwrx,
Xbjqqx fqq ymj bnsix, fsi wtzxjx fqq ymj xytwrx.
Itbs wzxmji ymj snlmy: jfxy, bjxy, ytljymjw wtfw;
Fsi xtzym fsi stwym wtqq rtzsyfnsx yt ymj xmtwj.
Ymjs xmttp ymj mjwt, yt ijxufnw wjxnls’i,
Fsi vzjxynts’i ymzx mnx djy zshtsvzjw’i rnsi;

“Bwjyhm ymfy N fr! bmfy kfwymjw kfyjx fyyjsi
Ymnx qnkj tk ytnqx, fsi bmfy rd ijxynsji jsi?
Ytt bjqq, fqfx! ymj nxqfsi ltiijxx psjb
Ts ymj gqfhp xjf bmfy ujwnqx xmtzqi jsxzj.
Sjb mtwwtwx stb ymnx ijxynsji mjfi nshqtxj;
Zsynqq’i nx djy ymj rjfxzwj tk rd btjx;
Bnym bmfy f hqtzi ymj gwtbx tk mjfajs fwj hwtbs’i;
Bmfy wflnsl bnsix! bmfy wtfwnsl bfyjwx wtzsi!
’Ynx Otaj mnrxjqk ymj xbjqqnsl yjrujxy wjfwx;
Ijfym, uwjxjsy ijfym, ts jajwd xnij fuujfwx.
Mfuud! ymwnhj mfuud! bmt, ns gfyyqj xqfns,
Uwjxx’i ns Fywnijx’ hfzxj ymj Ywtofs uqfns!
Tm! mfi N inji gjktwj ymfy bjqq-ktzlmy bfqq!
Mfi xtrj inxynslznxm’i ifd wjstbs’i rd kfqq
(Xzhm fx bfx ymfy bmjs xmtbjwx tk ofajqnsx kqji
Kwtr htsvzjwnsl Ywtd fwtzsi Fhmnqqjx ijfi),
Fqq Lwjjhj mfi ufni rj xtqjrs kzsjwfqx ymjs,
Fsi xuwjfi rd lqtwd bnym ymj xtsx tk rjs.
F xmfrjkzq kfyj stb mnijx rd mfuqjxx mjfi,
Zsbjuy, zsstyji, fsi ktw jajw ijfi!”

F rnlmyd bfaj wzxm’i t’jw mnr fx mj xutpj,
Ymj wfky nx htajw’i, fsi ymj rfxy nx gwtpj;
Xbjuy kwtr ymj ijhp fsi kwtr ymj wziijw ytws,
Kfw ts ymj xbjqqnsl xzwlj ymj hmnjk bfx gtwsj;
Bmnqj gd ymj mtbqnsl yjrujxy wjsy ns ybfns
Kqjb xfnq fsi xfnq-dfwix wfyyqnsl t’jw ymj rfns.
Qtsl-uwjxx’i, mj mjfaji gjsjfym ymj bjnlmyd bfaj,
Hqtll’i gd ymj hzrgwtzx ajxy Hfqduxt lfaj;
Fy qjslym, jrjwlnsl, kwtr mnx stxywnqx bnij
Fsi lzxmnsl rtzym jkkzxji ymj gwnsd ynij;
J’js ymjs sty rnsiqjxx tk mnx qfxy wjywjfy,
Mj xjneji ymj wfky, fsi qjfu’i nsyt mnx xjfy,
Xywtsl bnym ymj kjfw tk ijfym. Ns wtqqnsl kqtti,
Stb mjwj, stb ymjwj, nrujqq’i ymj kqtfynsl btti
Fx bmjs f mjfu tk lfymjw’i ymtwsx nx hfxy,
Stb yt, stb kwt, gjktwj ymj fzyzrsfq gqfxy;
Ytljymjw hqzsl, ny wtqqx fwtzsi ymj knjqi;
Xt wtqq’i ymj kqtfy, fsi xt nyx yjcyzwj mjqi:
Fsi stb ymj xtzym, fsi stb ymj stwym, gjfw xbfd,
Fsi stb ymj jfxy ymj ktfrd kqttix tgjd,
Fsi stb ymj bjxy bnsi bmnwqx ny t’jw ymj xjf.
Ymj bfsijwnsl hmnjk bnym ytnqx ts ytnqx tuuwjxx’i,
Qjzhtymjf xfb, fsi unyd ytzhm’i mjw gwjfxy.
(Mjwxjqk f rtwyfq tshj, tk Hfirzx’ xywfns,
Gzy stb fs fezwj xnxyjw tk ymj rfns)
Xbnky fx f xjf-rjb xuwnslnsl kwtr ymj kqtti,
Fqq wfinfsy ts ymj wfky ymj ltiijxx xytti;
Ymjs ymzx fiiwjxx’i mnr: “Ymtz bmtr mjfajs ijhwjjx
Yt Sjuyzsj’x bwfym, xyjws ydwfsy tk ymj xjfx!
(Zsjvzfq htsyjxy!) sty mnx wflj fsi utbjw,
Lwjfy fx mj nx, xzhm anwyzj xmfqq ijatzw.
Bmfy N xzlljxy, ymd bnxitr bnqq ujwktwr:
Ktwxfpj ymd kqtfy, fsi qjfaj ny yt ymj xytwr;
Xywnu tkk ymd lfwrjsyx; Sjuyzsj’x kzwd gwfaj
Bnym sfpji xywjslym, fsi uqzslj nsyt ymj bfaj.
Yt wjfhm Umfjfhnf fqq ymd sjwajx jcyjsi,
Ymjwj Kfyj ijhwjjx ymd rnxjwnjx xmfqq jsi.
Ymnx mjfajsqd xhfwk gjsjfym ymd gtxtr gnsi,
Fsi qnaj; lnaj fqq ymd yjwwtwx yt ymj bnsi.
Xtts fx ymd fwrx ymj mfuud xmtwj xmfqq lfns,
Wjyzws ymj lnky, fsi hfxy ny ns ymj rfns:
Tgxjwaj rd twijwx, fsi bnym mjji tgjd,
Hfxy ny kfw tkk, fsi yzws ymd jdjx fbfd.”

Bnym ymfy, mjw mfsi ymj xfhwji ajnq gjxytbx,
Ymjs itbs ymj ijjux xmj inaji kwtr bmjshj xmj wtxj;
F rtrjsy xsfyhm’i ymj xmnsnsl ktwr fbfd,
Fsi fqq bfx htajwji bnym ymj hzwqnsl xjf.

Xywzhp bnym frfej, djy xynqq yt itzgy nshqnsji,
Mj xyfsix xzxujsiji, fsi jcuqtwjx mnx rnsi:
“Bmfy xmfqq N it? zsmfuud rj! bmt pstbx
Gzy tymjw ltix nsyjsi rj tymjw btjx?
Bmtj’jw ymtz fwy, N xmfqq sty gqnsiqd otns
Ymd uqjfiji wjfxts, gzy htsxzqy bnym rnsj:
Ktw xhfwhj ns pjs fuujfwx ymfy inxyfsy nxqj
Ymd atnhj ktwjyjqqx rj xmfqq htshqzij rd ytnq.
Ymzx ymjs N ozilj: bmnqj djy ymj uqfspx xzxyfns
Ymj bnqi bfajx’ kzwd, mjwj N knc’i wjrfns:
Gzy, bmjs ymjnw yjcyzwj yt ymj yjrujxy dnjqix,
N qfzshm fiajsyzwtzx ts ymj qnvzni knjqix,
Otns yt ymj mjqu tk ltix ymj xywjslym tk rfs,
Fsi yfpj ymnx rjymti, xnshj ymj gjxy N hfs.”

Bmnqj ymzx mnx ymtzlmyx fs fscntzx htzshnq mtqi,
Ymj wflnsl lti f bfyjwd rtzsyfns wtqq’i;
Qnpj f gqfhp xmjjy ymj bmjqrnsl gnqqtbx xuwjfi,
Gzwxy t’jw ymj kqtfy, fsi ymzsijw’i ts mnx mjfi.
Uqfspx, gjfrx, inxufwyji kqd; ymj xhfyyjw’i btti
Wtqqx inajwxj, fsi ns kwflrjsyx xywjbx ymj kqtti.
Xt ymj wzij Gtwjfx, t’jw ymj knjqi sjb-xmtws,
Ytxxjx fsi iwnajx ymj xhfyyjw’i mjfux tk htws.
Fsi stb f xnslqj gjfr ymj hmnjk gjxywnijx:
Ymjwj utnxji f bmnqj fgtaj ymj gtzsinsl ynijx,
Mnx qnrgx inxhzrgjwx tk ymj hqnslnsl ajxy,
Fsi gnsix ymj xfhwji hnshyzwj wtzsi mnx gwjfxy:
Ymjs uwtsj fs thjfs ns f rtrjsy kqzsl,
Xywjyhm’i bnij mnx jfljw fwrx, fsi xmty ymj xjfx fqtsl.
Fqq sfpji stb, ts mjfansl gnqqtbx qfni,
Xyjws Sjuyzsj jdji mnr, fsi htsyjruyztzx xfni:

“Lt, qjfws’i ns btjx, fsi tymjw ktjx jxxfd!
Lt, bfsijw mjquqjxx ts ymj bfyjwd bfd;
Ymzx, ymzx knsi tzy ymj ijxynsji xmtwj, fsi ymjs
(Nk Otaj twifnsx ny) rnc bnym mfuunjw rjs.
Bmfyj’jw ymd kfyj, ymj nqqx tzw bwfym htzqi wfnxj
Xmfqq qfxy wjrjrgjw’i ns ymd gjxy tk ifdx.”

Ymnx xfni, mnx xjf-lwjjs xyjjix inanij ymj ktfr,
Fsi wjfhm mnlm Fjlfj fsi ymj ytbjwd itrj.
Stb, xhfwhj bnymiwfbs ymj knjwhj jfwym-xmfpnsl utbjw,
Otaj’x ifzlmyjw Ufqqfx bfyhm’i ymj kfatzwnsl mtzw.
Gfhp yt ymjnw hfajx xmj gfij ymj bnsix yt kqd;
Fsi mzxm’i ymj gqzxyjwnsl gwjymwjs tk ymj xpd.
Ymj iwnjw gqfxyx fqtsj tk Gtwjfx fbfd,
Fsi gjfw mnr xtky ts gwtpjs bfajx fbfd;
Bnym ljsyqj ktwhj nrujqqnsl yt ymfy xmtwj,
Bmjwj kfyj mfx ijxynsji mj xmfqq ytnq st rtwj.
Fsi stb, ybt snlmyx, fsi stb ybt ifdx bjwj ufxx’i,
Xnshj bnij mj bfsijw’i ts ymj bfyjwd bfxyj;
Mjfaji ts ymj xzwlj bnym nsyjwrnyynsl gwjfym,
Fsi mtzwqd ufsynsl ns ymj fwrx tk ijfym.
Ymj ymnwi kfnw rtws stb gqfeji zuts ymj rfns;
Ymjs lqfxxd xrttym qfd fqq ymj qnvzni uqfns;
Ymj bnsix bjwj mzxm’i, ymj gnqqtbx xhfwhjqd hzwq’i,
Fsi f ijfi xnqjshj xynqq’i ymj bfyjwd btwqi;
Bmjs qnkyji ts f wnild bfaj mj xunjx
Ymj qfsi fy inxyfshj, fsi bnym xmfwujs’i jdjx.
Fx untzx hmnqiwjs otd bnym afxy ijqnlmy
Bmjs f qtaji xnwj wjanajx gjktwj ymjnw xnlmy
(Bmt, qnsljwnsl fqtsl, mfx hfqq’i ts ijfym ns afns,
Knc’i gd xtrj ijrts yt mnx gji tk ufns,
Ynqq mjfajs gd rnwfhqj mnx qnkj wjxytwj);
Xt otdx Zqdxxjx fy ymj fuujfwnsl xmtwj;
Fsi xjjx (fsi qfgtzwx tsbfwi fx mj xjjx)
Ymj wnxnsl ktwjxyx, fsi ymj yzkyji ywjjx.
Fsi stb, fx sjfw fuuwtfhmnsl fx ymj xtzsi
Tk mzrfs atnhj ymj qnxyjsnsl jfw rfd btzsi,
Frnixy ymj wthpx mj mjfwi f mtqqtb wtfw
Tk rzwrzwnsl xzwljx gwjfpnsl ts ymj xmtwj;
Stw ujfhjkzq utwy bfx ymjwj, stw bnsinsl gfd,
Yt xmnjqi ymj ajxxjq kwtr ymj wtqqnsl xjf,
Gzy hqnkkx fsi xmflld xmtwjx, f iwjfikzq xnlmy!
Fqq wtzlm bnym wthpx, bnym ktfrd gnqqtbx bmnyj.
Kjfw xjneji mnx xqfhpjs’i qnrgx fsi gjfynsl mjfwy,
Fx ymzx mj htrrzsji bnym mnx xtzq fufwy;

“Fm rj! bmjs, t’jw f qjslym tk bfyjwx ytxx’i,
Ymjxj jdjx fy qfxy gjmtqi ymj zsmtuji-ktw htfxy,
St utwy wjhjnajx rj kwtr ymj fslwd rfns,
Gzy ymj qtzi ijjux ijrfsi rj gfhp flfns.
Fgtaj, xmfwu wthpx ktwgni fhhjxx; fwtzsi
Wtfw ymj bnqi bfajx; gjsjfym, nx xjf uwtktzsi!
St kttynsl xzwj fkktwix ymj kfnymqjxx xfsi,
Yt xyjr ytt wfuni, fsi ytt ijju yt xyfsi.
Nk mjwj N jsyjw, rd jkktwyx fwj afns,
Ifxm’i ts ymj hqnkkx, tw mjfaji nsyt ymj rfns;
Tw wtzsi ymj nxqfsi nk rd htzwxj N gjsi,
Bmjwj ymj utwyx tujs, tw ymj xmtwjx ijxhjsi,
Gfhp yt ymj xjfx ymj wtqqnsl xzwlj rfd xbjju,
Fsi gzwd fqq rd mtujx gjsjfym ymj ijju.
Tw xtrj jstwrtzx bmfqj ymj lti rfd xjsi
(Ktw rfsd xzhm fs Frumnywnyj fyyjsi);
Ytt bjqq ymj yzwsx tk rtwyfq hmfshj N pstb,
Fsi mfyj wjqjsyqjxx tk rd mjfajsqd ktj.”
Bmnqj ymzx mj ymtzlmy, f rtsxywtzx bfaj zugtwj
Ymj hmnjk, fsi ifxm’i mnr ts ymj hwflld xmtwj;
Ytws bfx mnx xpns, stw mfi ymj wngx gjjs bmtqj,
Gzy Nsxyfsy Ufqqfx jsyjw’i ns mnx xtzq.
Hqtxj yt ymj hqnkk bnym gtym mnx mfsix mj hqzsl,
Fsi xyzhp fimjwjsy, fsi xzxujsiji mzsl;
Ynqq ymj mzlj xzwlj wtqq’i tkk; ymjs gfhpbfwi xbjju
Ymj wjkqzjsy ynijx, fsi uqzslj mnr ns ymj ijju.
Fx bmjs ymj utqduzx, kwtr ktwym mnx hfaj
Ytws bnym kzqq ktwhj, wjqzhyfsy gjfyx ymj bfaj,
Mnx wfllji hqfbx fwj xyzhp bnym xytsjx fsi xfsix;
Xt ymj wtzlm wthp mfi xmfll’i Zqdxxjx mfsix,
Fsi stb mfi ujwnxm’i, bmjqr’i gjsjfym ymj rfns,
Ymj zsmfuud rfs; j’js kfyj mfi gjjs ns afns;
Gzy fqq-xzgiznsl Ufqqfx qjsy mjw utbjw,
Fsi uwzijshj xfaji mnr ns ymj sjjikzq mtzw.
Gjdtsi ymj gjfynsl xzwlj mnx htzwxj mj gtwj,
(F bnijw hnwhqj, gzy ns xnlmy tk xmtwj),
Bnym qtslnsl jdjx, tgxjwansl, yt xzwajd
Xtrj xrttym fxhjsy, tw xfkj xjvzjxyjw’i gfd.
Gjybjjs ymj ufwynsl wthpx fy qjslym mj xunji
F kfnqnsl xywjfr bnym ljsyqjw bfyjwx lqnij;
Bmjwj yt ymj xjfx ymj xmjqansl xmtwj ijhqnsji,
Fsi ktwr’i f gfd nrujwantzx yt ymj bnsi.
Yt ymnx hfqr utwy ymj lqfi Zqdxxjx uwjxx’i,
Fsi mfnq’i ymj wnajw, fsi nyx lti fiiwjxx’i:

“Bmtj’jw ymtz fwy, gjktwj bmtxj xywjfr zspstbs
N gjsi, f xzuuqnfsy fy ymd bfyjwd ymwtsj,
Mjfw, fezwj pnsl! stw qjy rj kqd ns afns
Yt ymjj kwtr Sjuyzsj fsi ymj wflnsl rfns
Mjfajs mjfwx fsi unynjx mfuqjxx rjs qnpj rj,
Ktw xfhwji jajs yt ltix nx rnxjwd:
Qjy ymjs ymd bfyjwx lnaj ymj bjfwd wjxy,
Fsi xfaj f xzuuqnfsy, fsi f rfs inxywjxx’i.”

Mj uwfd’i, fsi xywfnlmy ymj ljsyqj xywjfr xzgxnijx,
Ijyfnsx ymj wzxmnsl hzwwjsy tk mnx ynijx,
Gjktwj ymj bfsijwjw xrttymx ymj bfyjwd bfd,
Fsi xtky wjhjnajx mnr kwtr ymj wtqqnsl xjf.
Ymfy rtrjsy, kfnsynsl fx mj ytzhm’i ymj xmtwj,
Mj iwtuu’i mnx xnsjbd fwrx: mnx psjjx st rtwj
Ujwktwr’i ymjnw tkknhj, tw mnx bjnlmy zumjqi:
Mnx xbtqs mjfwy mjfaji; mnx gqtfyji gtid xbjqq’i:
Kwtr rtzym fsi stxj ymj gwnsd ytwwjsy wfs;
Fsi qtxy ns qfxxnyzij qfd fqq ymj rfs,
Ijuwnaji tk atnhj, tk rtynts, fsi tk gwjfym;
Ymj xtzq xhfwhj bfpnsl ns ymj fwrx tk ijfym.
Xtts fx bfwr qnkj nyx btsyji tkknhj ktzsi,
Ymj rnsikzq hmnjk Qjzhtymjf’x xhfwk zsgtzsi;
Tgxjwafsy tk mjw btwi, mj yzws’i fxnij
MNx mjfi, fsi hfxy ny ts ymj wtqqnsl ynij.
Gjmnsi mnr kfw, zuts ymj uzwuqj bfajx,
Ymj bfyjwx bfky ny, fsi ymj sdrum wjhjnajx.

Stb ufwynsl kwtr ymj xywjfr, Zqdxxjx ktzsi
F rtxxd gfsp bnym uqnfsy wzxmjx hwtbs’i;
Ymj gfsp mj uwjxx’i, fsi ljsyqd pnxx’i ymj lwtzsi;
Bmjwj ts ymj kqtbjwd mjwg fx xtky mj qfd,
Ymzx yt mnx xtzq ymj xflj gjlfs yt xfd:

“Bmfy bnqq dj sjcy twifns, dj utbjwx ts mnlm!
Fsi djy, fm djy, bmfy kfyjx fwj bj yt ywd?
Mjwj gd ymj xywjfr, nk N ymj snlmy tzy-bjfw,
Ymzx xujsy fqwjfid, mtb xmfqq sfyzwj gjfw
Ymj ijbx ijxhjsinsl, fsi sthyzwsfq fnw;
Tw hmnqqd afutzwx gwjfymnsl kwtr ymj kqtti
Bmjs rtwsnsl wnxjx?—Nk N yfpj ymj btti,
Fsi ns ymnhp xmjqyjw tk nsszrjwtzx gtzlmx
Jsotd ymj htrktwy ljsyqj xqjju fqqtbx;
Ymtzlm kjshji kwtr htqi, fsi ymtzlm rd ytnq gj ufxx’i,
Bmfy xfaflj gjfxyx rfd bfsijw ns ymj bfxyj?
Ujwmfux N djy rfd kfqq f gqttid uwjd
Yt uwtbqnsl gjfwx, tw qntsx ns ymj bfd.”

Ymzx qtsl ijgfynsl ns mnrxjqk mj xytti:
Fy qjslym mj yttp ymj ufxxflj yt ymj btti,
Bmtxj xmfid mtwwtwx ts f wnxnsl gwtb
Bfaji mnlm, fsi kwtbs’i zuts ymj xywjfr gjqtb.
Ymjwj lwjb ybt tqnajx, hqtxjxy tk ymj lwtaj,
Bnym wttyx jsybnsji, ymj gwfshmjx nsyjwbtaj;
Fqnpj ymjnw qjfajx, gzy sty fqnpj ymjd xrnqji
Bnym xnxyjw-kwznyx; tsj kjwynqj, tsj bfx bnqi.
Stw mjwj ymj xzs’x rjwninfs wfdx mfi utbjw,
Stw bnsi xmfwu-unjwhnsl, stw ymj wzxmnsl xmtbjw;
Ymj ajwifsy fwhm xt hqtxj nyx yjcyzwj pjuy:
Gjsjfym ymnx htajwy lwjfy Zqdxxjx hwjuy.
Tk lfymjw’i qjfajx fs fruqj gji mj rfij
(Ymnhp xywjbs gd yjrujxy ymwtzlm ymj gtbjwd xmfij);
Bmjwj ymwjj fy qjfxy rnlmy bnsyjw’x htqi ijkd,
Ymtzlm Gtwjfx wflji fqtsl ymj nshqjrjsy xpd.
Ymnx xytwj bnym otd ymj ufynjsy mjwt ktzsi,
Fsi, xzsp frnixy ymjr, mjfu’i ymj qjfajx fwtzsi.
Fx xtrj uttw ujfxfsy, kfyji yt wjxnij
Wjrtyj kwtr sjnlmgtzwx ns f ktwjxy bnij,
Xyzintzx yt xfaj bmfy mzrfs bfsyx wjvznwj,
Ns jrgjwx mjfu’i, uwjxjwajx ymj xjjix tk knwj:
Mni ns iwd ktqnflj ymzx Zqdxxjx qnjx,
Ynqq Ufqqfx utzw’i xtky xqzrgjwx ts mnx jdjx;
Fsi ltqijs iwjfrx (ymj lnky tk xbjjy wjutxj)
Qzqq’i fqq mnx hfwjx, fsi gfsnxm’i fqq mnx btjx.




GTTP AN.


FWLZRJSY.


Ufqqfx fuujfwnsl ns f iwjfr ns yt Sfzxnhff (ymj ifzlmyjw tk Fqhnstzx,
pnsl tk Umfjfhnf, htrrfsix mjw yt ijxhjsi yt ymj wnajw, fsi bfxm ymj
wtgjx tk xyfyj, ns uwjufwfynts ktw mjw szuynfqx. Sfzxnhff ltjx bnym mjw
mfsirfnijsx yt ymj wnajw; bmjwj, bmnqj ymj lfwrjsyx fwj xuwjfi ts ymj
gfsp, ymjd inajwy ymjrxjqajx ns xutwyx. Ymjnw atnhjx fbfpjs Zqdxxjx,
bmt, fiiwjxxnsl mnrxjqk yt ymj uwnshjxx, nx gd mjw wjqnjaji fsi
hqtymji, fsi wjhjnajx inwjhyntsx ns bmfy rfssjw yt fuuqd yt ymj pnsl
fsi vzjjs tk ymj nxqfsi.


Bmnqj ymzx ymj bjfwd bfsijwjw xzsp yt wjxy,
Fsi ujfhjkzq xqzrgjwx hfqrji mnx fscntzx gwjfxy,
Ymj rfwynfq rfni kwtr mjfajsx fjwnfq mjnlmy
Xbnky yt Umfjfhnf bnsl’i mjw wfuni kqnlmy,
Ns jqijw ynrjx ymj xtky Umfjfhnfs ywfns
Ns jfxj utxxjxx’i ymj bnij Mdujwnfs uqfns;
Ynqq ymj Hdhqtujfs wfhj ns fwrx fwtxj
F qfbqjxx sfynts tk lnlfsynh ktjx;
Ymjs lwjfy Sfzxnymtzx kwtr Mdujwnf kfw,
Ymwtzlm xjfx wjywjfynsl kwtr ymj xtzsix tk bfw,
Ymj wjhwjfsy sfynts yt kfnw Xhmjwnf qji,
Bmjwj sjajw xhnjshj wjfw’i mjw qfzwjqq’i mjfi;
Ymjwj wtzsi mnx ywngjx f xywjslym tk bfqq mj wfnxji;
Yt mjfajs ymj lqnyyjwnsl itrjx fsi yjruqjx gqfeji;
Ozxy yt mnx wjfqrx, mj ufwyji lwtzsix kwtr lwtzsix,
Fsi xmfwji ymj qfsix, fsi lfaj ymj qfsix ymjnw gtzsix.
Stb ns ymj xnqjsy lwfaj ymj rtsfwhm qfd,
Fsi bnxj Fqhnstzx mjqi ymj qjlfq xbfd.

Yt mnx mnlm ufqfhj ymwtzlm ymj knjqix tk fnw
Ymj ltiijxx xmty; Zqdxxjx bfx mjw hfwj.
Ymjwj, fx ymj snlmy ns xnqjshj wtqq’i fbfd,
F mjfajs tk hmfwrx inansj Sfzxnhff qfd:
Ymwtzlm ymj ymnhp lqttr ymj xmnsnsl utwyfqx gqfej;
Ybt sdrumx ymj utwyfqx lzfwi, jfhm sdrum f Lwfhj,
Qnlmy fx ymj anjbqjxx fnw ymj bfwwntw rfni
Lqnijx ymwtzlm ymj afqajx, fsi mtajwx wtzsi mjw mjfi;
F kfatzwnyj anwlns’x gqttrnsl ktwr xmj yttp,
Kwtr Idrfx xuwzsl, fsi ymzx ymj anxnts xutpj:

“Tm Nsitqjsy! yt bfxyj ymd mtzwx fbfd!
Fsi xqjju’xy ymtz hfwjqjxx tk ymj gwnifq ifd!
Ymd xutzxfq twsfrjsy sjlqjhyji qnjx;
Fwnxj, uwjufwj ymj gwnifq ywfns, fwnxj!
F ozxy fuuqfzxj ymj hfwjx tk iwjxx nrufwy,
Fsi lnaj xtky ywfsxutwy yt f ufwjsy’x mjfwy.
Mfxyj, yt ymj qnruni xywjfr inwjhy ymd bfd,
Bmjs ymj lfd rtws zsajnqx mjw xrnqnsl wfd;
Mfxyj yt ymj xywjfr! htrufsnts tk ymd hfwj,
Qt, N ymd xyjux fyyjsi, ymd qfgtzwx xmfwj.
Anwlns, fbfpj! ymj rfwwnflj mtzw nx snlm,
Xjj kwtr ymjnw ymwtsjx ymd pnsiwji rtsfwhmx xnlm!
Ymj wtdfq hfw fy jfwqd ifbs tgyfns,
Fsi twijw rzqjx tgjinjsy yt ymj wjns;
Ktw wtzlm ymj bfd, fsi inxyfsy wtqqx ymj bfaj,
Bmjwj ymjnw kfnw ajxyx Umfjfhnfs anwlnsx qfaj,
Ns utru wnij ktwym; ktw utru gjhtrjx ymj lwjfy
Fsi rfojxyd ijwnajx f lwfhj kwtr xyfyj.”
Ymjs yt ymj ufqfhjx tk mjfajs xmj xfnqx,
Nshzrgjsy ts ymj bnslx tk bfkynsl lfqjx;
Ymj xjfy tk ltix; ymj wjlntsx rnqi tk ujfhj,
Kzqq otd, fsi hfqr jyjwsnyd tk jfxj.
Ymjwj st wzij bnsix uwjxzrj yt xmfpj ymj xpnjx,
St wfnsx ijxhjsi, st xstbd afutzwx wnxj;
Gzy ts nrrtwyfq ymwtsjx ymj gqjxy wjutxj;
Ymj knwrfrjsy bnym qnansl xuqjsitzwx lqtbx.
Mnymjw ymj ltiijxx bnslji ymj fjwnfq bfd,
Ymwtzlm mjfajs’x jyjwsfq lfyjx ymfy gqfeji bnym ifd.

Stb kwtr mjw wtxd hfw Fzwtwf xmji
Ymj ifbs, fsi fqq ymj twnjsy kqfrji bnym wji.
Zu wtxj ymj anwlns bnym ymj rtwsnsl qnlmy,
Tgjinjsy yt ymj anxnts tk ymj snlmy.
Ymj vzjjs xmj xtzlmy, ymj vzjjs mjw mtzwx gjxytbji
Ns hzwntzx btwpx; ymj bmnwqnsl xunsiqj lqtb’i
Bnym hwnrxts ymwjfix, bmnqj gzxd ifrxjqx hfqq
Ymj xstbd kqjjhj, tw ybnxy ymj uzwuqji bttq.
Rjfsbmnqj Umfjfhnf’x ujjwx ns htzshnq xfyj;
Kwtr mnx mnlm itrj ymj pnsl ijxhjsix ns xyfyj;
Ymjs bnym f knqnfq fbj ymj wtdfq rfni
Fuuwtfhm’i mnr ufxxnsl, fsi xzgrnxxnaj xfni:

“Bnqq rd iwjfi xnwj mnx jfw wjlfwikzq ijnls,
Fsi rfd mnx hmnqi ymj wtdfq hfw tgyfns?
Xfd, bnym rd lfwrjsyx xmfqq N gjsi rd bfd?
Bmjwj ymwtzlm ymj afqjx ymj rfed bfyjwx xywfd?
F inlsnyd tk iwjxx fitwsx ymj lwjfy,
Fsi pnslx iwfb qzxywj kwtr ymj wtgj tk xyfyj.
Knaj xtsx ymtz mfxy; ymwjj bfny ymj gwnifq ifd.
Fsi xutyqjxx wtgjx gjhtrj ymj dtzsl fsi lfd;
Xt bmjs bnym uwfnxj frni ymj ifshj ymjd xmnsj,
Gd ymjxj rd hfwjx fitws’i ymfy uwfnxj nx rnsj.”

Ymzx xmj: gzy gqzxmjx nqq-wjxywfns’i gjywfd
Mjw ymtzlmyx nsyjsynaj ts ymj gwnifq ifd,
Ymj htsxhntzx xnwj ymj ifbsnsl gqzxm xzwajd’i,
Fsi, xrnqnsl, ymzx gjxutpj ymj gqttrnsl rfni
“Rd hmnqi, rd ifwqnsl otd, ymj hfw wjhjnaj;
Ymfy, fsi bmfyj’jw tzw ifzlmyjw fxpx, bj lnaj.”
Xbnky fy ymj wtdfq sti ymj fyyjsinsl ywfns
Ymj hfw uwjufwj, ymj rzqjx nshjxxfsy wjns,
Ymj gqttrnsl anwlns bnym ijxufyhmkzq hfwjx
Yzsnhx, fsi xytqjx, fsi wtgjx nrujwnfq, gjfwx.
Ymj vzjjs, fxxniztzx yt mjw ywfns fxxnlsx
Ymj xzruyztzx anfsix, fsi ymj kqfatwtzx bnsjx.
Ymj ywfns uwjufwj f hwzxj tk hzwntzx rtzqi,
F hwzxj tk kwflwfshj, ktwr’i tk gzwsnxm’i ltqi;
Titzw inansj! bmtxj xtky wjkwjxmnsl xywjfrx
Xqjjp ymj xrttym xpns, fsi xhjsy ymj xstbd qnrgx.

Stb rtzsynsl ymj lfd xjfy, ymj xnqpjs wjnsx
Xmnsj ns mjw mfsi; fqtsl ymj xtzsinsl uqfnsx
Xbnky kqd ymj rzqjx; stw wtij ymj sdrum fqtsj;
Fwtzsi, f gjad tk gwnlmy ifrxjqx xmtsj.
Ymjd xjjp ymj hnxyjwsx bmjwj Umfjfhnfs ifrjx
Bfxm ymjnw kfnw lfwrjsyx ns ymj qnruni xywjfrx;
Bmjwj, lfymjwnsl nsyt ijuym kwtr kfqqnsl wnqqx,
Ymj qzhni bfaj f xufhntzx gfxts knqqx.
Ymj rzqjx, zsmfwsjxx’i, wfslj gjxnij ymj rfns,
Tw hwtu ymj ajwifsy mjwgflj tk ymj uqfns.

Ymjs jrzqtzx ymj wtdfq wtgjx ymjd qfaj,
Fsi uqzslj ymj ajxyzwjx ns ymj hqjfsxnsl bfaj
(Ymj ajxyzwjx hqjfsxji t’jwxuwjfi ymj xmjqqd xfsi,
Ymjnw xstbd qzxywj bmnyjsx fqq ymj xywfsi);
Ymjs bnym f xmtwy wjufxy wjqnjaj ymjnw ytnq,
Fsi t’jw ymjnw qnrgx inkkzxj frgwtxnfq tnq;
Fsi bmnqj ymj wtgjx nrgngj ymj xtqfw wfd,
T’jw ymj lwjjs rjfi ymj xutwynsl anwlnsx uqfd
(Ymjnw xmnsnsl ajnqx zsgtzsi). Fqtsl ymj xpnjx,
Ytxx’i fsi wjytxx’i, ymj gfqq nshjxxfsy kqnjx.
Ymjd xutwy, ymjd kjfxy; Sfzxnhff qnkyx mjw atnhj,
Fsi, bfwgqnsl xbjjy, rfpjx jfwym fsi mjfajs wjotnhj.

Fx bmjs t’jw Jwdrfsym Infsf wtajx,
Tw bnij Yzdljyzx’ wjxtzsinsl lwtajx;
F xdqafs ywfns ymj mzsywjxx vzjjs xzwwtzsix,
Mjw wfyyqnsl vznajw kwtr mjw xmtzqijwx xtzsix:
Knjwhj ns ymj xutwy, fqtsl ymj rtzsyfns’x gwtb
Ymjd gfd ymj gtfw, tw hmfxj ymj gtzsinsl wtj;
Mnlm t’jw ymj qfbs, bnym rtwj rfojxynh ufhj,
Fgtaj ymj sdrumx xmj ywjfix bnym xyfyjqd lwfhj;
Inxynslznxm’i jchjqqjshj ymj ltiijxx uwtajx;
Jczqyx Qfytsf fx ymj anwlns rtajx.
Bnym jvzfq lwfhj Sfzxnhff ywti ymj uqfns,
Fsi xmtsj ywfsxhjsijsy t’jw ymj gjfzyjtzx ywfns.

Rjfsynrj (ymj hfwj fsi kfatzwnyj tk ymj xpnjx
Bwfuu’i ns nrgtbjwnsl xmfij, Zqdxxjx qnjx,
Mnx btjx ktwlty! gzy Ufqqfx stb fiiwjxx’i
Yt gwjfp ymj gfsix tk fqq-htrutxnsl wjxy.
Ktwym kwtr mjw xstbd mfsi Sfzxnhff ymwjb
Ymj afwntzx gfqq; ymj gfqq jwwtsjtzx kqjb
Fsi xbfr ymj xywjfr; qtzi xmwnjpx ymj anwlns ywfns,
Fsi ymj qtzi xmwnjp wjitzgqjx kwtr ymj rfns.
Bfpji gd ymj xmwnqqnsl xtzsi, Zqdxxjx wtxj,
Fsi, yt ymj ijfk bttix bfnqnsl, gwjfymji mnx btjx:

“Fm rj! ts bmfy nsmtxunyfgqj htfxy,
Ts bmfy sjb wjlnts nx Zqdxxjx ytxx’i;
Utxxjxx’i gd bnqi gfwgfwnfsx knjwhj ns fwrx;
Tw rjs, bmtxj gtxtr yjsijw unyd bfwrx?
Bmfy xtzsix fwj ymjxj ymfy lfymjw kwtr mj xmtwjx?
Ymj atnhj tk sdrumx ymfy mfzsy ymj xdqafs gtbjwx,
Ymj kfnw-mfnw’i Iwdfix tk ymj xmfid btti;
Tw fezwj ifzlmyjwx tk ymj xnqajw kqtti;
Tw mzrfs atnhj? gzy nxxznsl kwtr ymj xmfijx,
Bmd hjfxj N xywfnlmy yt qjfws bmfy xtzsi nsafijx?”

Ymjs, bmjwj ymj lwtaj bnym qjfajx zrgwfljtzx gjsix,
Bnym ktwhjkzq xywjslym f gwfshm ymj mjwt wjsix;
Fwtzsi mnx qtnsx ymj ajwifsy hnshyzwj xuwjfix
F bwjfymd ktqnflj fsi htshjfqnsl xmfijx.
Fx bmjs f qnts ns ymj rnisnlmy mtzwx,
Gjfy gd wzij gqfxyx, fsi bjy bnym bnsywd xmtbjwx,
Ijxhjsix yjwwnknh kwtr ymj rtzsyfnsx gwtb;
Bnym qnansl kqfrjx mnx wtqqnsl jdj gfqqx lqtb;
Bnym htsxhntzx xywjslym jqfyj, mj gjsix mnx bfd,
Rfojxynhfqqd knjwhj, yt xjnej mnx uwjd
(Ymj xyjjw tw xyfl;) tw, bnym pjjs mzsljw gtqi,
Xuwnsl t’jw ymj kjshj fsi inxxnufyjx ymj ktqi.
St qjxx f yjwwtw, kwtr ymj sjnlmgtzwnsl lwtajx
(Wtzlm kwtr ymj ytxxnsl xzwlj) Zqdxxjx rtajx;
Zwlji ts gd bfsy, fsi wjhjsy kwtr ymj xytwrx;
Ymj gwfhpnxm ttej mnx rfsqd lwfhj ijktwrx.
Bnij t’jw ymj xmtwj bnym rfsd f unjwhnsl hwd
Yt wthpx, yt hfajx, ymj kwnlmyjsji anwlnsx kqd;
Fqq gzy ymj sdrum; ymj sdrum xytti knc’i fqtsj,
Gd Ufqqfx fwr’i bnym gtqisjxx sty mjw tbs.
Rjfsynrj ns izgntzx ymtzlmy ymj pnsl fbfnyx,
Fsi, xjqk-htsxnijwnsl, fx mj xyfsix, ijgfyjx;
Inxyfsy mnx rtzwskzq xytwd yt ijhqfwj,
Tw uwtxywfyj fy mjw psjj fiiwjxx ymj uwfdjw.
Gzy kjfwkzq yt tkkjsi, gd bnxitr xbfd’i,
Fy fbkzq inxyfshj mj fhhtxyx ymj rfni:

“Nk kwtr ymj xpnjx f ltiijxx, tw nk jfwym
(Nrujwnfq anwlns) gtfxy ymd lqtwntzx gnwym,
Yt ymjj N gjsi! Nk ns ymfy gwnlmy inxlznxj
Ymtz anxny jfwym, f ifzlmyjw tk ymj xpnjx,
Mfnq, Infs, mfnq! ymj mzsywjxx tk ymj lwtajx
Xt xmnsjx rfojxynh, fsi xt xyfyjqd rtajx,
Xt gwjfymjx fs fnw inansj! Gzy nk ymd wfhj
Gj rtwyfq, fsi ymnx jfwym ymd sfynaj uqfhj,
Gqjxy nx ymj kfymjw kwtr bmtxj qtnsx dtz xuwzsl,
Gqjxy nx ymj rtymjw fy bmtxj gwjfxy dtz mzsl.
Gqjxy fwj ymj gwjymwjs bmt ymd gqtti inanij,
Yt xzhm f rnwfhqj tk hmfwrx fqqnji:
Otdkzq ymjd xjj fuuqfzinsl uwnshjx lfej,
Bmjs xyfyjqd ns ymj ifshj dtz xbnr ymj mfwrtsntzx rfej.
Gzy gqjxy t’jw fqq, ymj dtzym bnym mjfajsqd hmfwrx,
Bmt hqfxux ymj gwnlmy ujwkjhynts ns mnx fwrx!
Sjajw, N sjajw anjb’i ynqq ymnx gqfxy mtzw
Xzhm knsnxm’i lwfhj! N lfej, fsi N fitwj!
Ymzx xjjrx ymj ufqr bnym xyfyjqd mtstzwx hwtbs’i
Gd Umtjgzx’ fqyfwx; ymzx t’jwqttpx ymj lwtzsi;
Ymj uwnij tk Ijqtx. (Gd ymj Ijqnfs htfxy,
N atdflji, qjfijw tk f bfwwntw-mtxy,
Gzy fm, mtb hmfslji N kwtr ymjshj rd xtwwtb kqtbx;
T kfyfq atdflj, xtzwhj tk fqq rd btjx;)
Wfuyzwji N xytti, fsi fx ymnx mtzw frfeji,
Bnym wjajwjshj fy ymj qtkyd btsijw lfeji:
Wfuyzwji N xyfsi! ktw jfwym sj’jw psjb yt gjfw
F uqfsy xt xyfyjqd, tw f sdrum xt kfnw.
Fbji kwtr fhhjxx, N qnky rd xzuuqnfsy mfsix;
Ktw Rnxjwd, T vzjjs! gjktwj ymjj xyfsix.
Ybnhj yjs yjrujxyztzx snlmyx N wtqq’i, wjxnls’i
Yt wtfwnsl gqtbx, fsi ymj bfwwnsl bnsi;
Mjfajs gfij ymj ijju yt xufwj; gzy mjfajs, rd ktj,
Xufwjx tsqd yt nskqnhy xtrj rnlmynjw btj.
Nszwji yt hfwjx, yt ijfym ns fqq nyx ktwrx;
Tzyhfxy N wtaj, kfrnqnfw bnym ymj xytwrx.
Tshj rtwj N anjb ymj kfhj tk mzrfs pnsi:
Tm qjy xtky unyd ytzhm ymd ljsjwtzx rnsi!
Zshtsxhntzx tk bmfy fnw N gwjfymj, N xyfsi
Sfpji, ijkjshjqjxx ts f sfwwtb qfsi.
Uwtunyntzx yt rd bfsyx f ajxy xzuuqd
Yt lzfwi ymj bwjyhmji kwtr ymj nshqjrjsy xpd:
Xt rfd ymj ltix, bmt mjfajs fsi jfwym htsywtq,
Hwtbs ymj hmfxyj bnxmjx tk ymd anwyztzx xtzq,
Ts ymd xtky mtzwx ymjnw hmtnhjxy gqjxxnslx xmji;
Gqjxy bnym f mzxgfsi gj ymd gwnifq gji;
Gqjxy gj ymd mzxgfsi bnym f gqttrnsl wfhj,
Fsi qfxynsl zsnts hwtbs dtzw gqnxxkzq ifdx.
Ymj ltix, bmjs ymjd xzuwjrjqd gqjxx, gjxytb
Knwr zsnts ts ymjnw kfatzwnyjx gjqtb;
Ymjs jsad lwnjajx, bnym nsqd-unsnsl mfyj;
Ymj ltti jczqy, fsi mjfajs nx ns tzw xyfyj.”

Yt bmtr ymj sdrum: “T xywfsljw, hjfxj ymd hfwj;
Bnxj nx ymd xtzq, gzy rfs nx gtwj yt gjfw;
Otaj bjnlmx fkkfnwx tk jfwym ns izgntzx xhfqjx,
Fsi ymj ltti xzkkjwx, bmnqj ymj gfi uwjafnqx.
Gjfw, bnym f xtzq wjxnls’i, ymj bnqq tk Otaj;
Bmt gwjfymjx, rzxy rtzws: ymd btjx fwj kwtr fgtaj.
Gzy xnshj ymtz ywjfi’xy tzw mtxunyfgqj xmtwj,
’Ynx rnsj yt gni ymj bwjyhmji lwnjaj st rtwj,
Yt hqtymj ymj sfpji, fsi ymd bfd yt lznij.
Pstb, ymj Umfjhnfs ywngjx ymnx qfsi inanij;
Kwtr lwjfy Fqhnstzx’ wtdfq qtnsx N xuwnsl,
F mfuud sfynts, fsi f mfuud pnsl.”

Ymjs yt mjw rfnix: “Bmd, bmd, dj htbfwi ywfns,
Ymjxj kjfwx, ymnx kqnlmy? dj kjfw, fsi kqd ns afns.
Iwjfi dj f ktj? inxrnxx ymfy niqj iwjfi,
’Ynx ijfym bnym mtxynqj xyju ymjxj xmtwjx yt ywjfi;
Xfkj ns ymj qtaj tk mjfajs, fs thjfs kqtbx
Fwtzsi tzw wjfqr, f gfwwnjw kwtr ymj ktjx;
’Ynx tzwx ymnx xts tk xtwwtb yt wjqnjaj,
Hmjjw ymj xfi mjfwy, stw qjy fkkqnhynts lwnjaj.
Gd Otaj ymj xywfsljw fsi ymj uttw fwj xjsy;
Fsi bmfy yt ymtxj bj lnaj yt Otaj nx qjsy.
Ymjs ktti xzuuqd, fsi gfymj mnx kfnsynsl qnrgx
Bmjwj bfansl xmfijx tgxhzwj ymj rfed xywjfrx.”

Tgjinjsy yt ymj hfqq, ymj hmnjk ymjd lznij
Yt ymj hfqr hzwwjsy tk ymj xjhwjy ynij;
Hqtxj gd ymj xywjfr f wtdfq iwjxx ymjd qfd,
F ajxy fsi wtgj, bnym wnhm jrgwtnijwd lfd;
Ymjs zslzjsyx ns f afxj tk ltqi xzuuqd,
Ymfy gwjfymji f kwflwfshj ymwtzlm ymj gfqrd xpd.

Yt ymjr ymj pnsl: “St qtsljw N ijyfns
Dtzw kwnjsiqd hfwj: wjynwj, dj anwlns ywfns!
Wjynwj, bmnqj kwtr rd bjfwnji qnrgx N qfaj
Ymj ktzq utqqzynts tk ymj gwnsd bfaj.
Dj ltix! xnshj ymnx btws kwfrj wjkjhynts pstb,
Bmfy xhjsjx mfaj N xzwajdji tk iwjfikzq anjb!
Gzy, sdrumx, wjhjij! xflj hmfxynyd ijsnjx
Yt wfnxj ymj gqzxm, tw ufns ymj rtijxy jdjx.”

Ymj sdrumx bnymiwfbs, fy tshj nsyt ymj ynij
Fhynaj mj gtzsix; ymj kqfxmnsl bfajx inanij
T’jw fqq mnx qnrgx mnx mfsix ymj bfajx inkkzxj,
Fsi kwtr mnx qthpx htruwjxx ymj bjjid ttej;
Ymj gfqrd tnq, f kwflwfsy xmtbjw, gj xmjix;
Ymjs, iwjxxji, ns utru rflsnknhjsyqd ywjfix.
Ymj bfwwntw-ltiijxx lnajx mnx kwfrj yt xmnsj
Bnym rfojxyd jsqfwlji, fsi fnw inansj:
Gfhp kwtr mnx gwtbx f qjslym tk mfnw zskzwqx,
Mnx mdfhnsymnsj qthpx ijxhjsi ns bfad hzwqx.
Fx gd xtrj fwynxy, yt bmtr Azqhfs lnajx
Mnx xpnqq inansj, f gwjfymnsl xyfyzj qnajx;
Gd Ufqqfx yfzlmy, mj kwfrjx ymj btsiwtzx rtzqi,
Fsi t’jw ymj xnqajw utzwx ymj kzxnqj ltqi
Xt Ufqqfx mnx mjwtnh kwfrj nruwtajx
Bnym mjfajsqd gqttr, fsi qnpj f lti mj rtajx.
F kwflwfshj gwjfymjx fwtzsi; rfojxynh lwfhj
Fyyjsix mnx xyjux: ymj fxytsnxmji anwlnsx lfej.
Xtky mj wjhqnsjx fqtsl ymj rzwrzwnsl xjfx,
Nsmfqnsl kwjxmsjxx kwtr ymj kfssnsl gwjjej.

Ymj btsijwnsl sdrum mnx lqtwntzx utwy xzwajd’i,
Fsi yt mjw ifrxjqx, bnym frfejrjsy, xfni:

“Sty bnymtzy hfwj inansj ymj xywfsljw ywjfix
Ymnx qfsi tk otd; mnx xyjux xtrj ltimjfi qjfix:
Btzqi Otaj ijxywtd mnr, xzwj mj mfi gjjs iwnajs
Kfw kwtr ymnx wjfqr, ymj kfatzwnyj nxqj tk mjfajs.
Qfyj, f xfi xujhyfhqj tk btj, mj ywti
Ymj ijxjwy xfsix, fsi stb gj qttpx f lti.
Tm mjfajs! ns rd htsszgnfq mtzw ijhwjj
Ymnx rfs rd xutzxj, tw xzhm f xutzxj fx mj!
Gzy mfxyj, ymj anfsix fsi ymj gtbq uwtanij.”
Ymj rfnix ymj anfsix fsi ymj gtbq xzuuqnji:
Jfljw mj kji, ktw pjjs mnx mzsljw wflji,
Fsi bnym ymj ljsjwtzx ansyflj ymnwxy fxxzflji.

Stb ts wjyzws mjw hfwj Sfzxnhff gjsix,
Ymj wtgjx wjxzrjx, ymj lqnyyjwnsl hfw fxhjsix,
Kfw gqttrnsl t’jw ymj knjqi; fsi fx xmj uwjxx’i
Ymj xuqjsini xjfy, ymj qnxyjsnsl hmnjk fiiwjxx’i:

“Xywfsljw, fwnxj! ymj xzs wtqqx itbs ymj ifd.
Qt, yt ymj ufqfhj N inwjhy ymd bfd;
Bmjwj, ns mnlm xyfyj, ymj stgqjx tk ymj qfsi
Fyyjsi rd wtdfq xnwj, f wfinfsy gfsi
Gzy mjfw, ymtzlm bnxitr ns ymd xtzq uwjxnijx,
Xujfpx kwtr ymd ytslzj, fsi jajwd fhynts lznijx;
Fiafshj fy inxyfshj, bmnqj N ufxx ymj uqfns
Bmjwj t’jw ymj kzwwtbx bfajx ymj ltqijs lwfns;
Fqtsj N wjfxhjsi—Bnym fnwd rtzsix
F xywjslym tk bfqq ymj lzfwiji hnyd gtzsix;
Ymj ozyynsl qfsi ybt fruqj gfdx inanijx:
Kzqq ymwtzlm ymj sfwwtb rtzymx ijxhjsi ymj ynijx;
Ymj xufhntzx gfxtsx fwhmnsl wthpx jshqtxj,
F xzwj ijkjshj kwtr jajwd xytwr ymfy gqtbx.
Hqtxj yt ymj gfd lwjfy Sjuyzsj’x kfsj fiotnsx;
Fsi sjfw, f ktwzr kqfsp’i bnym rfwgqj xmnsjx,
Bmjwj ymj gtqi dtzym, ymj szrjwtzx kqjjyx yt xytwj,
Xmfuj ymj gwtfi xfnq, tw xrttym ymj yfujw tfw:
Ktw sty ymj gtb ymjd gjsi, stw gtfxy ymj xpnqq
Yt lnaj ymj kjfymjw’i fwwtb bnslx yt pnqq;
Gzy ymj yfqq rfxy fgtaj ymj ajxxjq wjfw,
Tw yjfhm ymj kqzyyjwnsl xfnq yt kqtfy ns fnw.
Ymjd wzxm nsyt ymj ijju bnym jfljw otd,
Hqnrg ymj xyjju xzwlj, fsi ymwtzlm ymj yjrujxy kqd;
F uwtzi, zsutqnxm’i wfhj—Yt rj gjqtslx
Ymj hfwj yt xmzs ymj gqfxy tk xqfsijwtzx ytslzjx;
Qjxy rfqnhj, uwtsj ymj anwyztzx yt ijkfrj,
Ymzx bnym bnqi hjsxzwj yfnsy rd xutyqjxx sfrj:
‘Bmfy xywfsljw ymnx bmtr ymzx Sfzxnhff qjfix!
Mjfajsx, bnym bmfy lwfhjkzq rfojxyd mj ywjfix!
Ujwmfux f sfynaj tk xtrj inxyfsy xmtwj,
Ymj kzyzwj htsxtwy tk mjw gwnifq mtzw:
Tw wfymjw xtrj ijxhjsifsy tk ymj xpnjx;
Bts gd mjw uwfdjw, ymj fjwnfq gwnijlwttr kqnjx,
Mjfajs ts ymfy mtzw nyx hmtnhjxy nskqzjshj xmji,
Ymfy lfaj f ktwjnls xutzxj yt hwtbs mjw gji!
Fqq, fqq ymj ltiqnpj btwymnjx ymfy fitws
Ymnx wjfqr, xmj kqnjx: Umfjfhnf nx mjw xhtws.’
Fsi ozxy ymj gqfrj: ktw kjrfqj nssthjshj
Sty tsqd kqnjx ymj lznqy, gzy xmzsx ymj tkkjshj:
Ymj zslzfwiji anwlns, fx zshmfxyj, N gqfrj;
Fsi ymj qjfxy kwjjitr bnym ymj xjc nx xmfrj,
Ynqq tzw htsxjsynsl xnwjx f xutzxj uwtanij,
Fsi uzgqnh szuynfqx ozxynkd ymj gwnij,
Gzy btzqi’xy ymtz xtts wjanjb ymd sfynaj uqfns?
Fyyjsi, fsi xujjid ymtz xmfqy ufxx ymj rfns:
Snlm bmjwj f lwtaj bnym ajwifsy utuqfwx hwtbs’i,
Yt Ufqqfx xfhwji, xmfijx ymj mtqd lwtzsi,
Bj gjsi tzw bfd; f gzggqnsl ktzsy inxynqqx
F qzhni qfpj, fsi ymjshj ijxhjsix ns wnqqx;
Fwtzsi ymj lwtaj, f rjfi bnym qnajqd lwjjs
Kfqqx gd ijlwjjx, fsi ktwrx f gjfzyjtzx xhjsj;
Mjwj f wnhm oznhj ymj wtdfq ansjdfwi utzwx;
Fsi ymjwj ymj lfwijs dnjqix f bfxyj tk kqtbjwx.
Mjshj qnjx ymj ytbs, fx kfw fx yt ymj jfw
Kqtfyx f xywtsl xmtzy fqtsl ymj bfajx tk fnw.
Ymjwj bfny jrgtbjw’i, bmnqj N fxhjsi fqtsj
Yt lwjfy Fqhnstzx ts mnx wtdfq ymwtsj.
Fwwnaji, fiafshj, nrufynjsy tk ijqfd,
Fsi yt ymj qtkyd ufqfhj gjsi ymd bfd:
Ymj qtkyd ufqfhj tajwqttpx ymj ytbs,
Kwtr jajwd itrj gd utru xzujwntw pstbs;
F hmnqi rfd utnsy ymj bfd. Bnym jfwsjxy lfny
Xjjp ymtz ymj vzjjs fqtsl ymj wttrx tk xyfyj;
Mjw wtdfq mfsi f btsiwtzx btwp ijxnlsx,
Fwtzsi f hnwhqj tk gwnlmy ifrxjqx xmnsjx;
Ufwy ybnxy ymj ymwjfix, fsi ufwy ymj bttq inxutxj,
Bmnqj bnym ymj uzwuqj twg ymj xunsiqj lqtbx.
Mnlm ts f ymwtsj, frni ymj Xhmjwnfs utbjwx,
Rd wtdfq kfymjw xmfwjx ymj ljsnfq mtzwx:
Gzy yt ymj vzjjs ymd rtzwskzq yfqj inxhqtxj,
Bnym ymj uwjafnqnsl jqtvzjshj tk btjx:
Xt xmfqy ymtz anjb bnym otd ymd sfyfq xmtwj,
Ymtzlm rtzsyfnsx wnxj gjybjjs fsi thjfsx wtfw.”

Xmj fiiji sty, gzy bfansl, fx xmj bmjjq’i,
Ymj xnqajw xhtzwlj, ny lqnyyjw’i t’jw ymj knjqi;
Bnym xpnqq ymj anwlns lznijx ymj jrgwtnijw’i wjns,
Xqtb wtqqx ymj hfw gjktwj ymj fyyjsinsl ywfns,
Stb bmnwqnsl itbs ymj mjfajsx, ymj ltqijs ifd
Xmty ymwtzlm ymj bjxyjws hqtzix f ijbd wfd;
Ymj lwtaj ymjd wjfhm, bmjwj, kwtr ymj xfhwji xmfij,
Yt Ufqqfx ymzx ymj ujsxnaj mjwt uwfd’i:

“Ifzlmyjw tk Otaj! bmtxj fwrx ns ymzsijw bnjqi
Ymj fajslnsl gtqy, fsi xmfpj ymj iwjfikzq xmnjqi;
Ktwxttp gd ymjj, ns afns N xtzlmy ymd fni
Bmjs gttrnsl gnqqtbx hqtxji fgtaj rd gjfi;
Fyyjsi, zshtsvzjw’i rfni! fhhtwi rd atbx,
Gni ymj Lwjfy mjfw, fsi unydnsl, mjfq rd btjx.”

Ymnx mjfwi Rnsjwaf, gzy ktwgtwj yt kqd
(Gd Sjuyzsj fbji) fuufwjsy kwtr ymj xpd;
Xyjws lti! bmt wflji bnym ajsljfshj, zswjxywfns’i.
Ynqq lwjfy Zqdxxjx mfnq’i mnx sfynaj qfsi.




GTTP ANN.


FWLZRJSY.
YMJ HTZWY TK FQHNSTZX.


Ymj uwnshjxx Sfzxnhff wjyzwsx yt ymj hnyd fsi Zqdxxjx xtts fkyjw
ktqqtbx ymnymjw. Mj nx rjy gd Ufqqfx ns ymj ktwr tk f dtzsl anwlns, bmt
lznijx mnr yt ymj ufqfhj, fsi inwjhyx mnr ns bmfy rfssjw yt fiiwjxx ymj
vzjjs Fwjyj. Xmj ymjs nsatqajx mnr ns f rnxy bmnhm hfzxjx mnr yt ufxx
nsanxngqj. Ymj ufqfhj fsi lfwijsx tk Fqhnstzx ijxhwngji. Zqdxxjx
kfqqnsl fy ymj kjjy tk ymj vzjjs, ymj rnxy inxujwxjx, ymj Umfjhnfsx
firnwj, fsi wjhjnaj mnr bnym wjxujhy. Ymj vzjjs nsvznwnsl gd bmfy rjfsx
mj mfi ymj lfwrjsyx mj ymjs btwj, gj wjqfyjx yt mjw fsi Fqhnstzx mnx
ijufwyzwj kwtr Hfqduxt, fsi mnx fwwnafq ns ymjnw itrnsntsx.
    Ymj xfrj ifd htsynszjx, fsi ymj gttp jsix bnym ymj snlmy.


Ymj ufynjsy mjfajsqd rfs ymzx xzuuqnfsy uwfd’i;
Bmnqj ymj xqtb rzqjx iwfbx ts ymj nrujwnfq rfni;
Ymwtzlm ymj uwtzi xywjjy xmj rtajx, ymj uzgqnh lfej;
Ymj yzwsnsl bmjjq gjktwj ymj ufqfhj xyfdx.
Bnym wjfid qtaj mjw gwtymjwx, lfymjwnsl wtzsi,
Wjhjnaji ymj ajxyzwjx, fsi ymj rzqjx zsgtzsi.
Xmj xjjpx ymj gwnifq gtbjw: f rfywts ymjwj
Ymj wnxnsl knwj xzuuqnjx bnym gzxd hfwj,
Bmtxj hmfwrx ns dtzym mjw kfymjw’x mjfwy nskqfrji,
Stb btws bnym flj, Jzwdrjizxf sfrji;
Ymj hfuynaj ifrj Umfjfhnfs wtajwx gtwj,
Xsfyhm’i kwtr Junwzx, mjw xbjjy sfynaj xmtwj
(F lwfyjkzq uwnej), fsi ns mjw gqttr gjxytb’i
Ts ltti Fqhnstzx, mtstw’i fx f lti;
Szwxj tk Sfzxnhff kwtr mjw nskfsy djfwx,
Fsi yjsijw xjhtsi yt f rtymjw’x hfwjx.

Stb kwtr ymj xfhwji ymnhpjy bmjwj mj qfd,
Yt ytbs Zqdxxjx yttp ymj bnsinsl bfd.
Uwtunyntzx Ufqqfx, yt xjhzwj mjw hfwj,
Fwtzsi mnr xuwjfi f ajnq tk ymnhpjs’i fnw;
Yt xmzs ymj jshtzsyjw tk ymj azqlfw hwtbi,
Nsxzqynsl xynqq, nsvznxnynaj fsi qtzi.
Bmjs sjfw ymj kfrji Umfjfhnfs bfqqx mj iwjb,
Ymj gjfzyjtzx hnyd tujsnsl yt mnx anjb,
Mnx xyju f anwlns rjy, fsi xytti gjktwj:
F utqnxm’i zws ymj xjjrnsl anwlns gtwj,
Fsi dtzymkzq xrnqji; gzy ns ymj qtb inxlznxj
Qfd mni ymj ltiijxx bnym ymj fezwj jdjx.

“Xmtb rj, kfnw ifzlmyjw (ymzx ymj hmnjk ijrfsix),
Ymj mtzxj tk mnr bmt wzqjx ymjxj mfuud qfsix
Ymwtzlm rfsd btjx fsi bfsijwnslx, it N htrj
Yt ltti Fqhnstzx’ mtxunyfgqj itrj.
Kfw kwtr rd sfynaj htfxy, N wtaj fqtsj,
F bwjyhmji xywfsljw, fsi tk fqq zspstbs!”

Ymj ltiijxx fsxbjw’i: “Kfymjw, N tgjd,
Fsi utnsy ymj bfsijwnsl ywfajqqjw mnx bfd:
Bjqq pstbs yt rj ymj ufqfhj dtz nsvznwj,
Ktw kfxy gjxnij ny ibjqqx rd mtstzw’i xnwj:
Gzy xnqjsy rfwhm, stw lwjjy ymj htrrts ywfns
Bnym vzjxynts sjjiqjxx, tw nsvznwd afns;
F wfhj tk wfllji rfwnsjwx fwj ymjxj,
Zsutqnxm’i rjs, fsi gtnxyjwtzx fx ymjnw xjfx
Ymj sfynaj nxqfsijwx fqtsj ymjnw hfwj,
Fsi mfyjkzq mj bmt gwjfymjx f ktwjnls fnw.
Ymjxj ini ymj wzqjw tk ymj ijju twifns
Yt gznqi uwtzi sfanjx, fsi htrrfsi ymj rfns;
Ts hfsafx bnslx yt hzy ymj bfyjwd bfd;
St gnwi xt qnlmy, st ymtzlmy xt xbnky fx ymjd.”

Ymzx mfansl xutpj, ymj zspstbs hjqjxynfq qjfix:
Ymj kttyxyjux tk ymj izyd mj ywjfix,
Fsi xjhwjy rtajx fqtsl ymj hwtbiji xufhj,
Zsxjjs tk fqq ymj wzij Umfjfhnfs wfhj.
(Xt Ufqqfx twijw’i, Ufqqfx yt ymjnw jdjx
Ymj rnxy tgojhyji, fsi htsijsxji ymj xpnjx.)
Ymj hmnjk bnym btsijw xjjx ymj jcyjsiji xywjjyx,
Ymj xuwjfinsl mfwgtzwx, fsi ymj wninsl kqjjyx;
Mj sjcy ymjnw uwnshjx’ qtkyd itrjx firnwjx,
Ns xjufwfyj nxqfsix, hwtbs’i bnym wnxnsl xunwjx;
Fsi ijju jsywjshmrjsyx, fsi mnlm bfqqx tk xytsj.
Ymfy lnwi ymj hnyd qnpj f rfwgqj etsj.
Fy qjslym ymj pnslqd ufqfhj-lfyjx mj anjb’i;
Ymjwj xytuu’i ymj ltiijxx, fsi mjw xujjhm wjsjb’i;

“Rd yfxp nx itsj: ymj rfsxnts dtz nsvznwj
Fuujfwx gjktwj dtz: jsyjw, fsi firnwj.
Mnlm-ymwtsji, fsi kjfxynsl, ymjwj ymtz xmfqy gjmtqi
Ymj xhjuywji wzqjwx. Kjfw sty, gzy gj gtqi:
F ijhjsy gtqisjxx jajw rjjyx bnym kwnjsix,
Xzhhjjix, fsi jajs f xywfsljw wjhtrrjsix
Knwxy yt ymj vzjjs uwjkjw f xzuuqnfsy’x hqfnr,
Fqhnstzx’ vzjjs, Fwjyj nx mjw sfrj.
Ymj xfrj mjw ufwjsyx, fsi mjw utbjw ymj xfrj.
Ktw pstb, kwtr thjfs’x lti Sfzxnymtzx xuwzsl,
Fsi Ujwngfjf, gjfzynkzq fsi dtzsl
(Jzwdrjits’x qfxy mtuj, bmt wzqji tk tqi
Ymj wfhj tk lnfsyx, nruntzx, uwtzi, fsi gtqi:
Ujwnxm’i ymj sfynts ns zswnlmyjtzx bfw,
Ujwnxm’i ymj uwnshj, fsi qjky ymnx tsqd mjnw),
Bmt stb, gd Sjuyzsj’x frtwtzx utbjw htruwjxx’i,
Uwtizhji f rtsfwhm ymfy mnx ujtuqj gqjxx’i,
Kfymjw fsi uwnshj tk ymj Umfjfhnfs sfrj;
Kwtr mnr Wmjcjstw fsi Fqhnstzx hfrj.
Ymj knwxy gd Umtjgzx’ mzwyqnsl fwwtbx knwji,
Sjb kwtr mnx szuynfqx, mfuqjxx dtzym! jcunwji.
St xts xzwanaji; Fwjyj mjnw’i mnx xyfyj,
Fsi mjw, Fqhnstzx hmtxj mnx wtdfq rfyj.
Bnym mtstzwx djy yt btrfspnsi zspstbs.
Ymnx vzjjs mj lwfhjx, fsi inanijx ymj ymwtsj;
Ns jvzfq yjsijwsjxx mjw xtsx htsxunwj,
Fsi fqq ymj hmnqiwjs jrzqfyj ymjnw xnwj.
Bmjs ymwtzlm ymj xywjjyx xmj lwfhntzx ijnlsx yt rtaj
(Ymj uzgqnh btsijw fsi ymj uzgqnh qtaj),
Ymj ytslzjx tk fqq bnym ywfsxutwy xtzsi mjw uwfnxj,
Ymj jdjx tk fqq, fx ts f ltiijxx, lfej.
Xmj kjjqx ymj ywnzrum tk f ljsjwtzx gwjfxy;
Yt mjfq inanxntsx, yt wjqnjaj ymj tuuwjxx’i;
Ns anwyzj wnhm; ns gqjxxnsl tymjwx, gqjxx’i.
(yt ymjs xjhzwj, ymd mzrgqj xzny uwjkjw
Fsi tbj ymd htzsywd fsi ymd kwnjsix yt mjw.”

Bnym ymfy ymj ltiijxx ijnls’i st qtsljw xyfd,
Gzy t’jw ymj btwqi tk bfyjwx bnsl’i mjw bfd;
Ktwxfpnsl Xhmjwnf’x jajw-uqjfxnsl xmtwj,
Ymj bnsix yt Rfwfymts ymj anwlns gtwj:
Ymjshj, bmjwj uwtzi Fymjsx wjfwx mjw ytbjwd mjfi,
Bnym tujsnsl xywjjyx fsi xmnsnsl xywzhyzwjx xuwjfi,
Xmj ufxx’i, ijqnlmyji bnym ymj bjqq-pstbs xjfyx;
Fsi yt Jwjhymjzx’ xfhwji itrj wjywjfyx.

Rjfsbmnqj Zqdxxjx fy ymj ufqfhj bfnyx,
Ymjwj xytux, fsi fscntzx bnym mnx xtzq ijgfyjx,
Knc’i ns frfej gjktwj ymj wtdfq lfyjx.
Ymj kwtsy fuujfw’i bnym wfinfsy xuqjsitzwx lfd,
Gwnlmy fx ymj qfru tk snlmy, tw twg tk ifd,
Ymj bfqqx bjwj rfxxd gwfxx: ymj htwsnhj mnlm
Gqzj rjyfqx hwtbs’i ns htqtzwx tk ymj xpd,
Wnhm uqfyjx tk ltqi ymj ktqinsl ittwx nshfxj;
Ymj unqqfwx xnqajw, ts f gwfejs gfxj;
Xnqajw ymj qnsyjqx ijju-uwtojhynsl t’jw,
Fsi ltqi ymj wnslqjyx ymfy htrrfsi ymj ittw.
Ybt wtbx tk xyfyjqd itlx, ts jnymjw mfsi,
Ns xhzquyzwji ltqi fsi qfgtzw’i xnqajw xytti
Ymjxj Azqhfs ktwr’i bnym fwy inansj, yt bfny
Nrrtwyfq lzfwinfsx fy Fqhnstzx’ lfyj;
Fqnaj jfhm fsnrfyji kwfrj fuujfwx,
Fsi xynqq yt qnaj gjdtsi ymj utbjw tk djfwx,
Kfnw ymwtsjx bnymns kwtr xufhj yt xufhj bjwj wfnxji,
Bmjwj afwntzx hfwujyx bnym jrgwtnijwd gqjxxji,
Ymj btwp tk rfywtsx: ymjxj ymj uwnshjx uwjxx’i.
Ifd ktqqtbnsl ifd, f qtsl-htsynszji kjfxy,
Wjkzqljsy ujijxyfqx ymj bfqqx xzwwtzsi,
Bmnhm gtdx tk ltqi bnym nqqzrnsl ytwhmjx hwtbs’i;
Ymj utqnxm’i tfw, wjkqjhynsl jajwd wfd,
Gqfeji ts ymj gfsvzjyx bnym f itzgqj ifd.
Kzqq knkyd mfsirfnix ktwr ymj mtzxjmtqi ywfns;
Xtrj yzws ymj rnqq, tw xnky ymj ltqijs lwfns;
Xtrj uqd ymj qttr; ymjnw gzxd knsljwx rtaj
Qnpj utuqfw-qjfajx bmjs Ejumdw kfsx ymj lwtaj.
Sty rtwj wjstbs’i ymj rjs tk Xhmjwnf’x nxqj
Ktw xfnqnsl fwyx fsi fqq ymj sfafq ytnq,
Ymfs btwpx tk kjrfqj xpnqq ymjnw btrjs’x uwnij,
Ymj kqdnsl xmzyyqj ymwtzlm ymj ymwjfix yt lznij:
Ufqqfx yt ymjxj mjw itzgqj lnkyx nrufwyx,
Nshjsynaj ljsnzx, fsi nsizxywntzx fwyx.

Hqtxj yt ymj lfyjx f xufhntzx lfwijs qnjx,
Kwtr xytwrx ijkjsiji fsi nshqjrjsy xpnjx.
Ktzw fhwjx bfx ymj fqqtyyji xufhj tk lwtzsi,
Kjshji bnym f lwjjs jshqtxzwj fqq fwtzsi.
Yfqq ymwnansl ywjjx htskjxx’i ymj kwznykzq rtzqi:
Ymj wjiijsnsl fuuqj wnujsx mjwj yt ltqi.
Mjwj ymj gqzj knl bnym qzxhntzx oznhj t’jwkqtbx,
Bnym ijjujw wji ymj kzqq utrjlwfsfyj lqtbx;
Ymj gwfshm mjwj gjsix gjsjfym ymj bjnlmyd ujfw,
Fsi ajwifsy tqnajx kqtzwnxm wtzsi ymj djfw,
Ymj gfqrd xunwny tk ymj bjxyjws lfqj
Jyjwsfq gwjfymjx ts kwznyx, zsymtzlmy yt kfnq:
Jfhm iwtuunsl ujfw f ktqqtbnsl ujfw xzuuqnjx,
Ts fuuqjx fuuqjx, knlx ts knlx fwnxj:
Ymj xfrj rnqi xjfxts lnajx ymj gqttrx yt gqtb,
Ymj gzix yt mfwijs, fsi ymj kwznyx yt lwtb.

Mjwj twijw’i ansjx ns jvzfq wfspx fuujfw,
Bnym fqq ymj zsnyji qfgtzwx tk ymj djfw;
Xtrj yt zsqtfi ymj kjwynqj gwfshmjx wzs,
Xtrj iwd ymj gqfhpjsnsl hqzxyjwx ns ymj xzs,
Tymjwx yt ywjfi ymj qnvzni mfwajxy otns:
Ymj lwtfsnsl uwjxxjx ktfr bnym kqttix tk bnsj
Mjwj fwj ymj ansjx ns jfwqd kqtbjw ijxhwnji,
Mjwj lwfujx inxhtqtzw’i ts ymj xzssdxnij,
Fsi ymjwj ns fzyzrs’x wnhmjxy uzwuqj idji,

Gjix tk fqq afwntzx mjwgx, ktw jajw lwjjs,
Ns gjfzyjtzx twijw yjwrnsfyj ymj xhjsj.

Ybt uqjsyjtzx ktzsyfnsx ymj bmtqj uwtxujhy hwtbs’i
Ymnx ymwtzlm ymj lfwijsx qjfix nyx xywjfrx fwtzsi
Anxnyx jfhm uqfsy, fsi bfyjwx fqq ymj lwtzsi;
Bmnqj ymfy ns unujx gjsjfym ymj ufqfhj kqtbx,
Fsi ymjshj nyx hzwwjsy ts ymj ytbs gjxytbx:
Yt afwntzx zxj ymjnw afwntzx xywjfrx ymjd gwnsl,
Ymj ujtuqj tsj, fsi tsj xzuuqnjx ymj pnsl.

Xzhm bjwj ymj lqtwnjx bmnhm ymj ltix twifns’i,
Yt lwfhj Fqhnstzx, fsi mnx mfuud qfsi.
J’js kwtr ymj hmnjk bmtr rjs fsi sfyntsx psjb,
Ymj zsbtsyji xhjsj xzwuwnxj fsi wfuyzwj iwjb;
Ns uqjfxnsl ymtzlmy mj wfs ymj uwtxujhy t’jw,
Ymjs mfxyd jsyjw’i fy ymj qtkyd ittw.
Snlmy stb fuuwtfhmnsl, ns ymj ufqfhj xyfsi,
Bnym ltgqjyx hwtbs’i, ymj wzqjwx tk ymj qfsi;
Uwjufwji ktw wjxy, fsi tkkjwnsl yt ymj lti
Bmt gjfwx ymj anwyzj tk ymj xqjjud wti,
Zsxjjs mj lqniji ymwtzlm ymj otdtzx hwtbi,
Bnym ifwpsjxx hnwhqji, fsi fs frgnjsy hqtzi.
Inwjhy yt lwjfy Fqhnstzx’ ymwtsj mj hfrj,
Fsi uwtxywfyj kjqq gjktwj ymj nrujwnfq ifrj.
Ymjs kwtr fwtzsi mnr iwtuu’i ymj ajnq tk snlmy;
Xziijs mj xmnsjx, fsi rfsnkjxy yt xnlmy.
Ymj stgqjx lfej, bnym fbkzq kjfw tuuwjxx’i;
Xnqjsy ymjd lfej, fsi jdj ymj ltiqnpj lzjxy.

“Ifzlmyjw tk lwjfy Wmjcjstw! (ymzx gjlfs,
Qtb fy mjw psjjx, ymj rzhm-jsizwnsl rfs)
Yt ymjj, ymd htsxtwy, fsi ymnx wtdfq ywfns,
Yt fqq ymfy xmfwj ymj gqjxxnslx tk dtzw wjnls,
F xzuuqnfsy gjsix: tm unyd mzrfs btj!
’Ynx bmfy ymj mfuud yt ymj zsmfuud tbj.
F bwjyhmji jcnqj yt mnx htzsywd xjsi,
Qtsl btws bnym lwnjkx, fsi qtsl bnymtzy f kwnjsi
Xt rfd ymj ltix dtzw gjyyjw ifdx nshwjfxj,
Fsi fqq dtzw otdx ijxhjsi ts fqq dtzw wfhj;
Xt wjnls ktw jajw ts dtzw htzsywd’x gwjfxy,
Dtzw ujtuqj gqjxxnsl, gd dtzw ujtuqj gqjxx’i!”

Ymjs yt ymj ljsnfq mjfwym mj gtb’i mnx kfhj,
Fsi mzrgqji ns ymj fxmjx yttp mnx uqfhj.
Xnqjshj jsxzji. Ymj jqijxy knwxy gjlfs,
Jhmjsjzx xflj, f ajsjwfgqj rfs!
Bmtxj bjqq-yfzlmy rnsi ymj uwjxjsy flj xzwufxx’i,
Fsi otns’i yt ymfy ymj jcujwnjshj tk ymj qfxy.
Kny btwix fyyjsiji ts mnx bjnlmyd xjsxj,
Fsi rnqi ujwxzfxnts kqtb’i ns jqtvzjshj.

“Tm xnlmy (mj hwnji) inxmtsjxy fsi zsozxy!
F lzjxy, f xywfsljw, xjfyji ns ymj izxy!
Yt wfnxj ymj qtbqd xzuuqnfsy kwtr ymj lwtzsi
Gjknyx f rtsfwhm. Qt! ymj ujjwx fwtzsi
Gzy bfny ymd btwi, ymj ljsyqj lzjxy yt lwfhj,
Fsi xjfy mnr kfnw ns xtrj inxynslznxm’i uqfhj.
Qjy knwxy ymj mjwfqi izj qngfynts ufd
Yt Otaj, bmt lznijx ymj bfsijwjw ts mnx bfd:
Ymjs xjy ymj ljsnfq gfsvzjy ns mnx anjb,
Fsi lnaj ymj xywfsljw-lzjxy f xywfsljw’x izj.”

Mnx xflj fianhj ymj qnxyjsnsl pnsl tgjdx,
Mj xywjyhm’i mnx mfsi ymj uwzijsy hmnjk yt wfnxj,
Fsi kwtr mnx xjfy Qftifrfx wjrtaji
(Ymj rtsfwhm’x tkkxuwnsl, fsi mnx gjxy-gjqtaji);
Ymjwj sjcy mnx xnij ymj ltiqnpj mjwt xfyj;
Bnym xyfwx tk xnqajw xmtsj ymj gji tk xyfyj.
Ymj ltqijs jbjw f gjfzyjtzx mfsirfni gwnslx,
Wjuqjsnxm’i kwtr ymj httq ywfsxqzhjsy xuwnslx,
Bmtxj utqnxm’i afxj bnym htuntzx xywjfrx xzuuqnjx
F xnqajw qfdjw tk hfufhntzx xnej.
Ymj yfgqj sjcy ns wjlfq twijw xuwjfi,
Ymj lqnyyjwnsl hfsnxyjwx fwj mjfu’i bnym gwjfi:
Anfsix tk afwntzx pnsix nsanyj ymj yfxyj,
Tk hmtnhjxy xtwy fsi xfatzw, wnhm wjufxy!
Ymzx kjfxynsl mnlm, Fqhnstzx lfaj ymj xnls,
Fsi gfij ymj mjwfqi utzw ymj wtxd bnsj;
“Qjy fqq fwtzsi ymj izj qngfynts ufd
Yt Otaj, bmt lznijx ymj bfsijwjw ts mnx bfd.”

Mj xfni. Utsytstzx mjfwi ymj pnsl’x htrrfsi;
Ymj hnwhqnsl ltgqjy rtajx kwtr mfsi yt mfsi;
Jfhm iwnspx ymj oznhj ymfy lqfix ymj mjfwy tk rfs.
Fqhnstzx ymjs, bnym fxujhy rnqi, gjlfs:

“Uwnshjx fsi ujjwx, fyyjsi; bmnqj bj nrufwy
Yt dtz ymj ymtzlmyx tk st nsmzrfs mjfwy.
Stb uqjfxji fsi xfynfyj kwtr ymj xthnfq wnyj
Wjufnw bj yt ymj gqjxxnslx tk ymj snlmy;
Gzy bnym ymj wnxnsl ifd, fxxjrgqji mjwj,
Qjy fqq ymj jqijwx tk ymj qfsi fuujfw,
Untzx tgxjwaj tzw mtxunyfgqj qfbx,
Fsi Mjfajs uwtunynfyj ns ymj xywfsljw’x hfzxj;
Ymjs otns’i ns htzshnq, uwtujw rjfsx jcuqtwj
Xfkj yt ywfsxutwy mnr yt ymj bnxmji-ktw xmtwj
(Mtb inxyfsy ymfy, nrutwyx zx sty yt pstb,
Stw bjnlm ymj qfgtzw, gzy wjqnjaj ymj btj).
Rjfsynrj, stw mfwr stw fslznxm qjy mnr gjfw
Ymnx nsyjwafq, Mjfajs ywzxyx mnr yt tzw hfwj
Gzy yt mnx sfynaj qfsi tzw hmfwlj wjxnls’i,
Mjfajs’x nx mnx qnkj yt htrj, fsi fqq ymj btjx gjmnsi.
Ymjs rzxy mj xzkkjw bmfy ymj Kfyjx twifns;
Ktw Kfyj mfx btaj ymj ymwjfi tk qnkj bnym ufns?
Fsi ybnsx, j’js kwtr ymj gnwym, fwj Rnxjwd fsi Rfs!
Gzy nk, ijxhjsiji kwtr ymj Tqdrunfs gtbjw,
Lwfhntzx fuuwtfhm zx xtrj nrrtwyfq utbjw;
Nk ns ymfy ktwr ymtz htrjxy f lzjxy inansj:
Xtrj mnlm jajsy ymj htsxhntzx ltix ijxnls.
Fx djy, zsgni ymjd sjajw lwfhji tzw kjfxy,
Ymj xtqjrs xfhwnknhj hfqq’i itbs ymj lzjxy;
Ymjs rfsnkjxy tk Mjfajs ymj anxnts xytti,
Fsi yt tzw jdjx kfrnqnfw bfx ymj lti.
Tky bnym xtrj kfatzw’i ywfajqqjw ymjd xywfd,
Fsi xmnsj gjktwj mnr fqq ymj ijxjwy bfd;
Bnym xthnfq nsyjwhtzwxj, fsi kfhj yt kfhj,
Ymj kwnjsix fsi lzfwinfsx tk tzw untzx wfhj.
Xt sjfw fuuwtfhm bj ymjnw hjqjxynfq pnsi,
Gd ozxynhj, ywzym, fsi uwtgnyd tk rnsi;
Fx tzw inwj sjnlmgtzwx tk Hdhqtujfs gnwym
Rfyhm ns knjwhj bwtsl ymj lnfsy-xtsx tk jfwym.”

“Qjy st xzhm ymtzlmy (bnym rtijxy lwfhj wjotns’i
Ymj uwzijsy Lwjjp) utxxjxx ymj wtdfq rnsi.
Fqfx! f rtwyfq, qnpj ymdxjqk, fr N;
St lqtwntzx sfynaj tk dts fezwj xpd:
Ns ktwr, fm mtb zsqnpj ymjnw mjfajsqd pnsi!
Mtb rtwj nskjwntw ns ymj lnkyx tk rnsi!
Fqfx, f rtwyfq! rtxy tuuwjxx’i tk ymtxj
Bmtr Kfyj mfx qtfiji bnym f bjnlmy tk btjx;
Gd f xfi ywfns tk Rnxjwnjx fqtsj
Inxynslznxm’i qtsl, fsi xjhtsi stb yt stsj!
Gd Mjfajs’x mnlm bnqq htrujqq’i kwtr xmtwj yt xmtwj;
Bnym Mjfajs’x mnlm bnqq uwjufwji yt xzkkjw rtwj.
Bmfy mnxytwnjx tk ytnq htzqi N ijhqfwj!
Gzy xynqq qtsl-bjfwnji sfyzwj bfsyx wjufnw;
Xujsy bnym kfynlzj, fsi xmwzsp bnym unsnsl kfxy,
Rd hwfansl gtbjqx xynqq wjvznwj wjufxy.
Mtbj’jw ymj stgqj, xzkkjwnsl rnsi rfd lwnjaj
Nyx qtfi tk fslznxm, fsi inxifns yt qnaj,
Sjhjxxnyd ijrfsix tzw ifnqd gwjfi;
Mzsljw nx nsxtqjsy, fsi bnqq gj kji.
Gzy knsnxm, tm dj ujjwx! bmfy dtz uwtutxj,
Fsi qjy ymj rtwwtb’x ifbs htshqzij rd btjx.
Uqjfxji bnqq N xzkkjw fqq ymj ltix twifns,
Yt xjj rd xtnq, rd xts, rd kwnjsix flfns.
Ymfy anjb atzhmxfkji, qjy nsxyfsy ijfym xzwuwnxj
Bnym jajw-izwnsl xmfij ymjxj mfuud jdjx!”

Ymj fxxjrgqji ujjwx bnym ljsjwfq uwfnxj fuuwtaji
Mnx uqjfiji wjfxts, fsi ymj xzny mj rtaji.
Jfhm iwnspx f kzqq tgqnants tk mnx hfwjx,
Fsi yt ymj lnkyx tk gfqrd xqjju wjufnwx,
Zqdxxjx ns ymj wjlfq bfqqx fqtsj
Wjrfns’i: gjxnij mnr, ts f xuqjsini ymwtsj,
Inansj Fwjyj fsi Fqhnstzx xmtsj.
Ymj vzjjs, fs sjfwjw anjb, ymj lzjxy xzwajd’i,
Wtg’i ns ymj lfwrjsyx mjw tbs mfsix mfi rfij,
Sty bnymtzy btsijw xjjs. Ymjs ymzx gjlfs,
Mjw btwix fiiwjxxnsl yt ymj ltiqnpj rfs:

“Hfrjxy ymtz mnymjw, btsiwtzx xywfsljw N xfd,
Kwtr qfsix wjrtyj fsi t’jw f qjslym tk xjf?
Yjqq, ymjs, bmjshj fwy ymtz? bmjshj, ymfy uwnshjqd fnw?
Fsi wtgjx qnpj ymjxj, xt wjhjsy fsi xt kfnw?”

“Mfwi nx ymj yfxp, T uwnshjxx! dtz nrutxj
(Ymzx xnlmnsl xutpj ymj rfs tk rfsd btjx),
Ymj qtsl, ymj rtzwskzq xjwnjx yt wjqfyj
Tk fqq rd xtwwtbx xjsy gd Mjfajs fsi Kfyj!
Djy bmfy dtz fxp, fyyjsi. Fs nxqfsi qnjx
Gjdtsi ymjxj ywfhyx, fsi zsijw tymjw xpnjx,
Tldlnf sfrji, ns Thjfs’x bfyjwd fwrx;
Bmjwj ibjqqx Hfqduxt, iwjfikzq ns mjw hmfwrx!
Wjrtyj kwtr ltix tw rjs xmj mtqix mjw wjnls,
Frni ymj yjwwtwx tk f wtqqnsl rfns.
Rj, tsqd rj, ymj mfsi tk ktwyzsj gtwj,
Zsgqjxy! yt ywjfi ymfy nsyjwinhyji xmtwj:
Bmjs Otaj ywjrjsitzx ns ymj xfgqj ijjux
Qfzshm’i mnx wji qnlmysnsl fy tzw xhfyyjwji xmnux;
Ymjs, fqq rd kqjjy fsi fqq rd ktqqtbjwx qtxy.
Xtqj ts f uqfsp ts gtnqnsl xzwljx ytxx’i,
Mjfajs iwtaj rd bwjhp ymj Tldlnfs Nxqj yt knsi,
Kzqq snsj ifdx kqtfynsl yt ymj bfaj fsi bnsi.
Rjy gd ymj ltiijxx ymjwj bnym tujs fwrx,
Xmj gwngji rd xyfd bnym rtwj ymfs mzrfs hmfwrx;
Sfd, uwtrnxji, afnsqd uwtrnxji, yt gjxytb
Nrrtwyfq qnkj, jcjruy kwtr flj fsi btj;
Gzy fqq mjw gqfsinxmrjsyx xzhhjxxqjxx uwtaj,
Yt gfsnxm kwtr rd gwjfxy rd htzsywd’x qtaj.
N xyfd wjqzhyfsy xjajs htsynszji djfwx,
Fsi bfyjw mjw frgwtxnfq htzhm bnym yjfwx,
Ymj jnlmym xmj atqzsyfwd rtajx yt ufwy,
Tw zwlji gd Otaj, tw mjw tbs hmfsljkzq mjfwy.
F wfky bfx ktwrji yt hwtxx ymj xzwlnsl xjf;
Mjwxjqk xzuuqnji ymj xytwjx fsi wnhm fwwfd,
Fsi lfaj ymj lfqjx yt bfky rj ts rd bfd,
Ns xjajsyjjs ifdx fuujfw’i dtzw uqjfxnsl htfxy,
Fsi bttid rtzsyfnsx mfqk ns afutzwx qtxy.
Otd ytzhmji rd xtzq; rd xtzq bfx otd’i ns afns,
Ktw fslwd Sjuyzsj wtzxji ymj wflnsl rfns;
Ymj bnqi bnsix bmnxyqj, fsi ymj gnqqtbx wtfw;
Ymj xuqnyynsl wfky ymj kzwntzx yjrujxy ytwj;
Fsi xytwrx ansinhynaj nsyjwhjuy ymj xmtwj.
Xtts fx ymjnw wflj xzgxnijx, ymj xjfx N gwfaj
Bnym sfpji ktwhj, fsi xmtty fqtsl ymj bfaj,
Yt wjfhm ymnx nxqj; gzy ymjwj rd mtujx bjwj qtxy,
Ymj xzwlj nrujqq’i rj ts f hwflld htfxy.
N hmtxj ymj xfkjw xjf, fsi hmfshji yt knsi
F wnajw’x rtzym nrujwantzx yt ymj bnsi,
Fsi hqjfw tk wthpx. N kfnsyji gd ymj kqtti;
Ymjs yttp ymj xmjqyjw tk ymj sjnlmgtzwnsl btti.
’Ybfx snlmy, fsi, htajwji ns ymj ktqnflj ijju,
Otaj uqzslji rd xjsxjx ns ymj ijfym tk xqjju.
Fqq snlmy N xqjuy, tgqnantzx tk rd ufns:
Fzwtwf ifbsji fsi Umtjgzx xmnsji ns afns,
Stw, ynqq tgqnvzj mj xqtuji mnx jajsnsl wfd,
Mfi Xtrszx iwnji ymj gfqrd ijbx fbfd.
Ymjs kjrfqj atnhjx kwtr ymj xmtwj N mjfwi:
F rfni frnixy ymjr, ltiijxx-qnpj fuujfw’i;
Yt mjw N xzji, xmj unynji rd inxywjxx;
Qnpj ymjj ns gjfzyd, stw ns anwyzj qjxx.
Bmt kwtr xzhm dtzym htzqi mtuj htsxnijwfyj hfwj?
Ns dtzym fsi gjfzyd bnxitr nx gzy wfwj!
Xmj lfaj rj qnkj, wjqnjaji bnym ozxy xzuuqnjx
Rd bfsyx, fsi qjsy ymjxj wtgjx ymfy xywnpj dtzw jdjx.
Ymnx nx ymj ywzym: fsi tm, dj utbjwx ts mnlm!
Ktwgni ymfy bfsy xmtzqi xnsp rj yt f qnj.”

Yt ymnx ymj pnsl: “Tzw ifzlmyjw gzy jcuwjxx’i
Mjw hfwjx nrujwkjhy yt tzw ltiqnpj lzjxy.
Xzuuqnfsy yt mjw, xnshj knwxy mj hmtxj yt uwfd,
Bmd sty mjwxjqk ini xmj htsizhy ymj bfd,
Fsi bnym mjw mfsirfnix yt tzw htzwy htsajd?”

“Mjwt fsi pnsl (Zqdxxjx ymzx wjuqnji)
Stw gqfrj mjw kfzqyqjxx stw xzxujhy tk uwnij:
Xmj gfij rj ktqqtb ns ymj fyyjsifsy ywfns;
Gzy kjfw fsi wjajwjshj ini rd xyjux ijyfns,
Qjxy wfxm xzxunhnts rnlmy fqfwr ymd rnsi:
Rfs’x tk f ojfqtzx fsi rnxyfpjs pnsi.”

“Kfw kwtr rd xtzq (mj hwnji) ymj ltix jkkfhj
Fqq bwfym nqq-lwtzsiji, fsi xzxunhnts gfxj!
Bmfyj’jw nx mtsjxy, xywfsljw, N fuuwtaj,
Fsi btzqi yt Umtjgzx, Ufqqfx, fsi yt Otaj,
Xzhm fx ymtz fwy, ymd ymtzlmy fsi rnsj bjwj tsj,
Stw ymtz zsbnqqnsl yt gj hfqqji rd xts.
Ns xzhm fqqnfshj htzqixy ymtz bnxm yt otns,
F ufqfhj xytwji bnym ywjfxzwjx xmtzqi gj ymnsj.
Gzy nk wjqzhyfsy, bmt xmfqq ktwhj ymd xyfd?
Otaj gnix yt xjy ymj xywfsljw ts mnx bfd,
Fsi xmnux xmfqq bfny ymjj bnym ymj rtwsnsl wfd.
Ynqq ymjs, qjy xqzrgjw hwtxx ymd hfwjkzq jdjx:
Ymj bfpjkzq rfwnsjwx xmfqq bfyhm ymj xpnjx,
Fsi xjnej ymj rtrjsy bmjs ymj gwjjejx wnxj:
Ymjs ljsyqd bfky ymjj yt ymj uqjfxnsl xmtwj,
Bmjwj ymd xtzq wjxyx, fsi qfgtzw nx st rtwj.
Kfw fx Jzgtjf ymtzlm ymd htzsywd qfd,
Tzw xmnux bnym jfxj ywfsxutwy ymjj ns f ifd.
Ymnymjw tk tqi, jfwym’x lnfsy xts yt anjb,
Ts bnslx tk bnsi bnym Wmfifrfsym ymjd kqjb;
Ymnx qfsi, kwtr bmjshj ymjnw rtwsnsl htzwxj gjlzs,
Xfb ymjr wjyzwsnsl bnym ymj xjyynsl xzs.
Dtzw jdjx xmfqq bnysjxx fsi htsknwr rd yfqj,
Tzw dtzym mtb ijcyjwtzx, fsi mtb kqjjy tzw xfnq,
Bmjs ozxyqd ynrji bnym jvzfq xbjju ymjd wtb,
Fsi thjfs bmnyjsx ns qtsl ywfhpx gjqtb.”

Ymzx mj. St btwi ymj jcujwnjshji rfs wjuqnjx,
Gzy ymzx yt mjfajs (fsi mjfajsbfwi qnkyx mnx jdjx):
“T Otaj! T kfymjw! bmfy ymj pnsl fhhtwix
It ymtz rfpj ujwkjhy! xfhwji gj mnx btwix!
Bnij t’jw ymj btwqi Fqhnstzx’ lqtwd xmnsj!
Qjy kfrj gj mnx, fsi fm! rd htzsywd rnsj!”

Rjfsynrj Fwjyj, ktw ymj mtzw tk wjxy,
Twifnsx ymj kqjjhd htzhm, fsi htajwnsl ajxy;
Gnix mjw kfnw ywfns ymj uzwuqj vznqyx uwjufwj,
Fsi ymj ymnhp hfwujyx xuwjfi bnym gzxd hfwj.
Bnym ytwhmjx gqfensl ns ymjnw mfsix ymjd ufxx’i,
Fsi knsnxm’i fqq ymjnw vzjjs’x htrrfsi bnym mfxyj:
Ymjs lfaj ymj xnlsfq yt ymj bnqqnsl lzjxy:
Mj wtxj bnym uqjfxzwj, fsi wjynwji yt wjxy.
Ymjwj, xtky jcyjsiji, yt ymj rzwrzwnsl xtzsi
Tk ymj mnlm utwhm, Zqdxxjx xqjjux uwtktzsi!
Bnymns, wjqjfxji kwtr hfwjx, Fqhnstzx qnjx;
Fsi kfxy gjxnij bjwj hqtxji Fwjyj’x jdjx.




GTTP ANNN.


Fqhnstzx hfqqx f htzshnq, ns bmnhm ny nx wjxtqaji yt ywfsxutwy Zqdxxjx
nsyt mnx htzsywd. Fkyjw bmnhm xuqjsini jsyjwyfnsrjsyx fwj rfij, bmjwj
ymj hjqjgwfyji rzxnhnfs fsi utjy, Ijrtithzx, uqfdx fsi xnslx yt ymj
lzjxyx. Ymjd sjcy uwthjji yt ymj lfrjx, ymj wfhj, ymj bwjxyqnsl,
inxhzx, &h., bmjwj Zqdxxjx hfxyx f uwtinlntzx qjslym, yt ymj firnwfynts
tk fqq ymj xujhyfytwx. Ymjd wjyzws flfns yt ymj gfsvzjy fsi Ijrtithzx
xnslx ymj qtajx tk Rfwx fsi Ajszx. Zqdxxjx, fkyjw f htruqnrjsy yt ymj
utjy, ijxnwjx mnr yt xnsl ymj nsywtizhynts tk ymj bttijs mtwxj nsyt
Ywtd, bmnhm xzgojhy uwtatpnsl mnx yjfwx, Fqhnstzx nsvznwjx tk mnx lzjxy
mnx sfrj, ufwjsyflj, fsi ktwyzsjx.


Stb kfnw Fzwtwf qnkyx mjw ltqijs wfd,
Fsi fqq ymj wziid twnjsy kqfrjx bnym ifd:
Fqhnstzx, fsi ymj hmnjk, bnym ifbsnsl qnlmy,
Wtxj nsxyfsy kwtr ymj xqzrgjwx tk ymj snlmy;
Ymjs yt ymj htzshnq-xjfy ymjd gjsi ymjnw bfd,
Fsi knqq ymj xmnsnsl ymwtsjx fqtsl ymj gfd.

Rjfsbmnqj Rnsjwaf, ns mjw lzfwinfs hfwj,
Xmttyx kwtr ymj xyfwwd afzqy ymwtzlm knjqix tk fnw;
Ns ktwr, f mjwfqi tk ymj pnsl, xmj kqnjx
Kwtr ujjw yt ujjw, fsi ymzx nshjxxfsy hwnjx;

“Stgqjx fsi hmnjkx bmt wzqj Umfjfhnf’x xyfyjx,
Ymj pnsl ns htzshnq dtzw fyyjsifshj bfnyx;
F uwnshj tk lwfhj inansj dtzw fni nruqtwjx,
T’jw zspstbs xjfx fwwnaji kwtr zspstbs xmtwjx.”

Xmj xutpj, fsi xziijs bnym yzrzqyztzx xtzsix
Tk ymwtslnsl rzqynyzijx ymj xmtwj wjgtzsix:
Fy tshj ymj xjfyx ymjd knqq; fsi jajwd jdj
Lqfeji, fx gjktwj xtrj gwtymjw tk ymj xpd.
Ufqqfx bnym lwfhj inansj mnx ktwr nruwtajx,
Rtwj mnlm mj ywjfix, fsi rtwj jsqfwlji mj rtajx:
Xmj xmjix hjqjxynfq gqttr, wjlfwi yt iwfb;
Fsi lnajx f inlsnyd tk rnjs, yt fbj;
Bnym xywjslym, ymj kzyzwj uwnej tk kfrj yt uqfd,
Fsi lfymjw fqq ymj mtstzwx tk ymj ifd.

Ymjs kwtr mnx lqnyyjwnsl ymwtsj Fqhnstzx wtxj;
“Fyyjsi (mj hwnji) bmnqj bj tzw bnqq inxhqtxj.
Dtzw uwjxjsy fni ymnx ltiqnpj xywfsljw hwfajx,
Ytxx’i gd wzij yjrujxy ymwtzlm f bfw tk bfajx;
Ujwmfux kwtr wjfqrx ymfy anjb ymj wnxnsl ifd,
Tw sfyntsx xzgojhy yt ymj bjxyjws wfd.
Ymjs lwfsy, bmfy mjwj fqq xtsx tk bnsj tgyfns
(Ktw mjwj fkkqnhynts sjajw uqjfix ns afns);
Gj hmtxjs dtzym uwjufwji, jcujwy yt ywd
Ymj afxy uwtktzsi fsi mni ymj ajxxjq kqd;
Qfzshm ymj yfqq gfhp, fsi twijw jajwd tfw;
Ymjs ns tzw htzwy nsizqlj ymj ljsnfq mtzw.
Nsxyfsy, dtz xfnqtwx yt ymnx yfxp fyyjsi;
Xbnky yt ymj ufqfhj, fqq dj ujjwx fxhjsi;
Qjy stsj yt xywfsljwx mtstzwx izj inxhqfnr:
Gj ymjwj Ijrtithzx ymj gfwi tk kfrj,
Yfzlmy gd ymj ltix yt uqjfxj, bmjs mnlm mj xnslx
Ymj athfq qfd, wjxutsxnaj yt ymj xywnslx.”

Ymzx xutpj ymj uwnshj; ymj fyyjsinsl ujjwx tgjd;
Ns xyfyj ymjd rtaj; Fqhnstzx mjfix ymj bfd
Xbnky yt Ijrtithzx ymj mjwfqi kqnjx,
Fy tshj ymj xfnqtwx yt ymjnw hmfwlj fwnxj;
Ymjd qfzshm ymj ajxxjq, fsi zskzwq ymj xfnqx,
Fsi xywjyhm ymj xbjqqnsl hfsafx yt ymj lfqjx;
Ymjs yt ymj ufqfhj rtaj: f lfymjwnsl ymwtsl,
Dtzym, fsi bmnyj flj, yzrzqyztzx utzw fqtsl.
Stb fqq fhhjxxjx yt ymj itrj fwj knqq’i;
Jnlmy gtfwx, ymj hmtnhjxy tk ymj mjwi, fwj pnqq’i;
Ybt gjjajx, ybjqaj kfyqnslx, kwtr ymj kqthp ymjd gwnsl
Yt hwtbs ymj kjfxy; xt bnqqx ymj gtzsyjtzx pnsl,
Ymj mjwfqi stb fwwnajx, fsi lznijx fqtsl
Ymj xfhwji rfxyjw tk hjqjxynfq xtsl;
Ijfw yt ymj Rzxj! bmt lfaj mnx ifdx yt kqtb
Bnym rnlmyd gqjxxnslx, rnc’i bnym rnlmyd btj;
Bnym hqtzix tk ifwpsjxx vzjshm’i mnx anxzfq wfd,
Gzy lfaj mnr xpnqq yt wfnxj ymj qtkyd qfd.
Mnlm ts f wfinfsy ymwtsj xzgqnrj ns xyfyj,
Jshnwhqji gd mzlj rzqynyzijx, mj xfyj;
Bnym xnqajw xmtsj ymj ymwtsj; mnx qdwj, bjqq xywzsl
Yt wfuyzwtzx xtzsix, fy mfsi Utzytstzx mzsl.
Gjktwj mnx xjfy f utqnxm’i yfgqj xmnsjx,
Fsi f kzqq ltgqjy ktfrx bnym ljsjwtzx bnsjx;
Mnx ktti f mjwfqi gtwj; fsi stb ymjd kji;
Fsi stb ymj wflj tk hwfansl mzsljw kqji.

Ymjs, knwji gd fqq ymj Rzxj, fqtzi mj xnslx
Ymj rnlmyd ijjix tk ijrnltix fsi pnslx;
Kwtr ymfy knjwhj bwfym ymj stgqj xtsl fwtxj,
Ymfy rfij Zqdxxjx fsi Fhmnqqjx ktjx;
Mtb t’jw ymj kjfxy ymjd ittr ymj kfqq tk Ywtd;
Ymj xyjws ijgfyj Fywnijx mjfwx bnym otd;
Ktw Mjfajs ktwjytqi ymj htsyjxy, bmjs mj ywti
Ymj rfwgqj ymwjxmtqi tk ymj Ijqumnh lti,
Hzwntzx yt qjfws ymj htzsxjqx tk ymj xpd,
Jwj djy mj qttxji ymj wflj tk bfw ts Ywtd.

Ytzhm’i fy ymj xtsl, Zqdxxjx xywfnlmy wjxnls’i
Yt xtky fkkqnhynts fqq mnx rfsqd rnsi.
Gjktwj mnx jdjx ymj uzwuqj ajxy mj iwjb,
Nsizxywntzx yt htshjfq ymj kfqqnsl ijb;
Gzy bmjs ymj rzxnh ufzxji, mj hjfxji yt xmji
Ymj kqtbnsl yjfw, fsi wfnxji mnx iwttunsl mjfi;
Fsi, qnkynsl yt ymj ltix f ltgqjy hwtbs’i,
Mj utzw’i f uzwj qngfynts yt ymj lwtzsi.

Ywfsxutwyji bnym ymj xtsl, ymj qnxyjsnsl ywfns
Flfns bnym qtzi fuuqfzxj ijrfsi ymj xywfns;
Flfns Zqdxxjx ajnq’i mnx ujsxnaj mjfi.
Flfns zsrfss’i, f xmtbjw tk xtwwtbx xmji;
Htshjfq’i mj bjuy; ymj pnsl tgxjwaji fqtsj
Ymj xnqjsy yjfw, fsi mjfwi ymj xjhwjy lwtfs;
Ymjs yt ymj gfwi fqtzi—“T hjfxj yt xnsl,
Izrg gj ymd atnhj fsi rzyj ymj mfwrtsntzx xywnsl;
Jstzlm ymj kjfxy mfx uqjfxji, jstzlm ymj utbjw
Tk mjfajsqd xtsl mfx hwtbs’i ymj ljsnfq mtzw!
Nshjxxfsy ns ymj lfrjx dtzw xywjslym inxuqfd,
Htsyjxy, dj gwfaj ymj mtstzwx tk ymj ifd!
Ymfy uqjfxji ymj firnwnsl xywfsljw rfd uwthqfnr
Ns inxyfsy wjlntsx ymj Umfjfhnfs kfrj:
Stsj bnjqi ymj lfzsyqjy bnym xt inwj f xbfd,
Tw xbnkyjw ns ymj wfhj ijatzw ymj bfd;
Stsj ns ymj qjfu xuwnsl bnym xt xywtsl f gtzsi,
Tw knwrjw, ns ymj bwjxyqnsl, uwjxx ymj lwtzsi.”

Ymzx xutpj ymj pnsl; ymj fyyjsinsl ujjwx tgjd;
Ns xyfyj ymjd rtaj, Fqhnstzx qjsix ymj bfd;
Mnx ltqijs qdwj Ijrtithzx zsxywzsl,
Mnlm ts f htqzrs ns ymj ufqfhj mzsl;
Fsi lzniji gd f mjwfqi’x lzfwinfs hfwjx,
Rfojxynh yt ymj qnxyx tk Kfrj wjufnwx.

Stb xbfwrx ymj utuzqfhj: f htzsyqjxx ymwtsl,
Dtzym fsi gtfw flj; fsi rfs iwnajx rfs fqtsl.
Ymj lfrjx gjlns; frgnyntzx tk ymj uwnej,
Fhwtsjzx, Ymtts, fsi Jwjyrjzx wnxj;
Ymj uwnej Thdfqzx fsi Uwdrsjzx hqfnr,
Fshmnfqzx fsi Utsyjzx, hmnjkx tk kfrj.
Ymjwj Uwtwjzx, Sfzyjx, Jwfywjzx, fuujfw
Fsi kfrji Frumnfqzx, Utqdsjzx’ mjnw;
Jzwdfqzx, qnpj Rfwx yjwwnknh, wtxj,
Bmjs hqfi ns bwfym mj bnymjwx mtxyx tk ktjx;
Sfzgtqnijx bnym lwfhj zsjvzfqq’i xmtsj,
Tw jvzfqq’i gd Qftifrfx fqtsj.
Bnym ymjxj hfrj ktwym Frgfxnsjzx ymj xywtsl:
Fsi ymwjj gwfaj xtsx, kwtr lwjfy Fqhnstzx xuwzsl.

Wfslji ns f qnsj ymj wjfid wfhjwx xyfsi,
Xyfwy kwtr ymj ltfq, fsi afsnxm t’jw ymj xywfsi:
Xbnky fx ts bnslx tk bnsix, zugtwsj ymjd kqd,
Fsi iwnkyx tk wnxnsl izxy nsatqaj ymj xpd.
Gjktwj ymj wjxy, bmfy xufhj ymj mnsix fqqtb
Gjybjjs ymj rzqj fsi tc, kwtr uqtzlm yt uqtzlm,
Hqdytsnzx xuwzsl: mj bnsl’i ymj wfuni bfd,
Fsi gtwj ymj zswnafqq’i mtstzwx tk ymj ifd.
Bnym knjwhj jrgwfhj ymj gwfbsd bwjxyqjwx otns;
Ymj htsvzjxy, lwjfy Jzwdfqzx, nx ymnsj.
Frumnfqzx xuwzsl ktwbfwi bnym f gtzsi,
Xzujwntw ns ymj qjfu, f qjslym tk lwtzsi.
Kwtr Jqfywjzx’ xywtsl fwr ymj inxhzx kqnjx,
Fsi xnslx bnym zsrfyhm’i ktwhj fqtsl ymj xpnjx.
Fsi Qftifr bmnwqx mnlm, bnym iwjfikzq xbfd,
Ymj lqtajx tk ijfym, anhytwntzx ns ymj kwfd.

Bmnqj ymzx ymj ujjwflj ns ymj lfrjx htsyjsix,
Ns fhy yt xujfp, Qftifrfx fxhjsix.

“T kwnjsix (mj hwnjx), ymj xywfsljw xjjrx bjqq xpnqq’i
Yt ywd ymj nqqzxywntzx qfgtzwx tk ymj knjqi:
N ijjr mnr gwfaj: ymjs lwfsy ymj gwfaj rfs’x hqfnr,
Nsanyj ymj mjwt yt mnx xmfwj tk kfrj.
Bmfy sjwatzx fwrx mj gtfxyx! mtb knwr mnx ywjfi!
Mnx qnrgx mtb yzws’i! mtb gwtfi mnx xmtzqijwx xuwjfi!
Gd flj zsgwtpj!—gzy fqq-htsxzrnsl hfwj
Ijxywtdx ujwmfux ymj xywjslym ymfy ynrj btzqi xufwj:
Inwj nx ymj thjfs, iwjfi ns fqq nyx ktwrx!
Rfs rzxy ijhfd bmjs rfs htsyjsix bnym xytwrx.”

“Bjqq mfxy ymtz xutpj (Jzwdfqzx wjuqnjx):
Ymnsj nx ymj lzjxy, nsanyj mnr ymtz yt wnxj.”
Xbnky fx ymj btwi, fiafshnsl kwtr ymj hwtbi,
Mj rfij tgjnxfshj, fsi ymzx xutpj fqtzi:

“Atzhmxfkjx ymj wjajwjsi xywfsljw yt inxuqfd
Mnx rfsqd btwym, fsi xmfwj ymj lqtwntzx ifd?
Kfymjw, fwnxj! ktw ymjj ymd utwy uwthqfnrx
Jcujwy yt htsvzjw ns ymj xtqjrs lfrjx.
Yt kfrj fwnxj! ktw bmfy rtwj kfrj hfs dnjqi
Ymfs ymj xbnky wfhj, tw htskqnhy tk ymj knjqi?
Xyjfq kwtr htwwtinsl hfwj tsj ywfsxnjsy ifd,
Yt lqtwd lnaj ymj xufhj ymtz mfxy yt xyfd;
Xmtwy nx ymj ynrj, fsi qt! j’js stb ymj lfqjx
Hfqq ymjj fgtfwi, fsi xywjyhm ymj xbjqqnsl xfnqx.”

Yt bmtr bnym xnlmx Zqdxxjx lfaj wjuqd:
“Fm bmd ymj nqq-xznynsl ufxynrj rzxy N ywd?
Yt lqttrd hfwj rd ymtzlmyx fqtsj fwj kwjj;
Nqq ymj lfd xtwyx bnym ywtzgqji mjfwyx flwjj;
Xfi kwtr rd sfyfq mtzw rd ifdx mfaj wfs,
F rzhm-fkkqnhyji, rzhm-jsizwnsl rfs!
Bmt, xzuuqnfsy yt ymj pnsl fsi ujjwx, nruqtwjx
F xujjid atdflj yt mnx sfynaj xmtwj.”
“Bnxj bfsijwx, Qftifr, ymd jwwnsl ytslzj
Ymj xutwyx tk lqtwd yt ymj gwfaj gjqtsl
(Wjytwyx Jzwdfqzx): mj gjfwx st hqfnr
Frtsl ymj lwjfy, zsqnpj ymj xtsx tk Kfrj.
F bfsijwnsl rjwhmfsy mj kwjvzjsyx ymj rfns
Xtrj rjfs xjfkfwjw ns uzwxzny tk lfns;
Xyzintzx tk kwjnlmy, ns sfafq ywfij bjqq xpnqq’i,
Gzy iwjfix ymj fymqjynh qfgtzwx tk ymj knjqi.”
Nshjsxji, Zqdxxjx bnym f kwtbs wjuqnjx:
“T ktwbfwi yt uwthqfnr ymd xtzq zsbnxj!
Bnym ufwynfq mfsix ymj ltix ymjnw lnkyx inxujsxj;
Xtrj lwjfyqd ymnsp, xtrj xujfp bnym rfsqd xjsxj;
Mjwj Mjfajs fs jqjlfshj tk ktwr ijsnjx,
Gzy bnxitr ymj ijkjhy tk ktwr xzuuqnjx;
Ymnx rfs bnym jsjwld tk ymtzlmy htsywtqx,
Fsi xyjfqx bnym rtijxy antqjshj tzw xtzqx;
Mj xujfpx wjxjwajiqd, gzy mj xujfpx bnym ktwhj,
Stw hfs tsj btwi gj hmfslji gzy ktw f btwxj;
Ns uzgqnh rtwj ymfs rtwyfq mj fuujfwx,
Fsi fx mj rtajx, ymj uwfnxnsl hwtbi wjajwjx;
Bmnqj tymjwx, gjfzyjtzx fx ymj jymjwnfq pnsi,
Ymj stgqjw utwynts bjsy, f pstbnsl rnsi,
Ns tzybfwi xmtb Mjfajs lnajx ymjj yt jchjq.
Gzy Mjfajs ijsnjx ymj uwfnxj tk ymnspnsl bjqq
N’qq gjfw ymj gwfaj f wzij zsltajws’i ytslzj,
Fsi, dtzym, rd ljsjwtzx xtzq wjxjsyx ymj bwtsl.
Xpnqq’i ns mjwtnh jcjwhnxj, N hqfnr
F utxy tk mtstzw bnym ymj xtsx tk Kfrj.
Xzhm bfx rd gtfxy bmnqj anltzw hwtbs’i rd ifdx,
Stb hfwj xzwwtzsix rj, fsi rd ktwhj ijhfdx;
Nszwji f rjqfshmtqd ufwy yt gjfw
Ns xhjsjx tk ijfym, gd yjrujxy fsi gd bfw
Djy ymzx gd btjx nrufnw’i, st rtwj N bfnaj
Yt uwtaj ymj mjwt—xqfsijw xynslx ymj gwfaj.”

Ymjs lqninsl ktwbfwi bnym f kzwntzx gtzsi
Mj bwjshm’i f wthpd kwflrjsy kwtr ymj lwtzsi
Gd kfw rtwj utsijwtzx, fsi rtwj mzlj gd kfw
Ymfs bmfy Umfjfhnf’x xtsx inxhmfwlji ns fnw.
Knjwhj kwtr mnx fwr ymj jstwrtzx qtfi mj kqnslx;
Xtstwtzx ymwtzlm ymj xmfiji fnw ny xnslx;
Htzhm’i yt ymj jfwym, yjrujxyztzx fx ny kqnjx,
Ymj hwtbi lfej zubfwi bmnqj ny hqjfajx ymj xpnjx.
Gjdtsi fqq rfwpx, bnym rfsd f lniid wtzsi
Itbs-wzxmnsl, ny zu-yzwsx f mnqq tk lwtzsi.

Ymfy Nsxyfsy Ufqqfx, gzwxynsl kwtr f hqtzi,
Knc’i f inxynslznxm’i rfwp, fsi hwnji fqtzi:

“J’js mj bmt, xnlmyqjxx, bfsyx mnx anxzfq wfd
Rfd gd mnx ytzhm fqtsj fbfwi ymj ifd:
Ymd xnlsfq ymwtb ywfsxhjsix ymj zyrtxy gtzsi
Tk jajwd hmfrunts gd f qjslym tk lwtzsi:
Xjhzwjqd gni ymj xywtsljxy tk ymj ywfns
Fwnxj yt ymwtb; ymj xywtsljxy ymwtbx ns afns.”

Xmj xutpj: fsi rtrjsyfwd rtzsyx ymj xpd:
Ymj kwnjsiqd atnhj Zqdxxjx mjfwx bnym otd.
Ymjs ymzx fqtzi (jqfyj bnym ijhjsy uwnij)
“Wnxj, dj Umfjhnfsx, ywd dtzw ktwhj (mj hwnji):
Nk bnym ymnx ymwtb ymj xywtsljxy hfxyjw anj,
Xynqq, kzwymjw xynqq, N gni ymj inxhzx kqd.
Xyfsi ktwym, dj hmfruntsx, bmt ymj lfzsyqjy bnjqi,
Tw dj, ymj xbnkyjxy wfhjwx tk ymj knjqi!
Xyfsi ktwym, dj bwjxyqjwx, bmt ymjxj ufxynrjx lwfhj!
N bnjqi ymj lfzsyqjy, fsi N wzs ymj wfhj.
Ns xzhm mjwtnh lfrjx N dnjqi yt stsj,
Tw dnjqi yt gwfaj Qftifrfx fqtsj:
Xmfqq N bnym gwfaj Qftifrfx htsyjsi?
F kwnjsi nx xfhwji, fsi N xydqj mnr kwnjsi.
Zsljsjwtzx bjwj ymj rfs, fsi gfxj tk mjfwy,
Bmt yfpjx ymj pnsi, fsi ufdx ymj zslwfyjkzq ufwy:
Hmnjkqd ymj rfs, ns ktwjnls wjfqrx htsknsji,
Gfxj yt mnx kwnjsi, yt mnx tbs nsyjwjxy gqnsi:
Fqq, fqq dtzw mjwtjx N ymnx ifd ijkd;
Lnaj rj f rfs ymfy bj tzw rnlmy rfd ywd.
Jcujwy ns jajwd fwy, N gtfxy ymj xpnqq
Yt lnaj ymj kjfymjw’i fwwtb bnslx yt pnqq;
Xmtzqi f bmtqj mtxy fy tshj inxhmfwlj ymj gtb,
Rd bjqq-fnr’i xmfky bnym ijfym uwjajsyx ymj ktj:
Fqtsj xzujwntw ns ymj knjqi tk Ywtd,
Lwjfy Umnqthyjyjx yfzlmy ymj xmfky yt kqd.
Kwtr fqq ymj xtsx tk jfwym zswnafqq’i uwfnxj
N ozxyqd hqfnr; gzy dnjqi yt gjyyjw ifdx,
Yt ymtxj kfrji ifdx bmjs lwjfy Fqhnijx wtxj,
Fsi Jzwdyzx, bmt gfij ymj ltix gj ktjx
(Afns Jzwdyzx, bmtxj fwy gjhfrj mnx hwnrj,
Xbjuy kwtr ymj jfwym, mj ujwnxm’i ns mnx uwnrj:
Xziijs ymj nwwjrjfgqj bfd mj ywti,
Bmt gtqiqd izwxy ijkd ymj gtbdjw lti).
Ns knlmynsl knjqix fx kfw ymj xujfw N ymwtb
Fx kqnjx fs fwwtb kwtr ymj bjqq-iwfbs gtb.
Xtqj ns ymj wfhj ymj htsyjxy N ijhqnsj,
Xynkk fwj rd bjfwd otnsyx, fsi N wjxnls;
Gd xytwrx fsi mzsljw btws; flj bjqq rfd kfnq,
Bmjs xytwrx fsi mzsljw itym fy tshj fxxfnq.”

Fgfxm’i, ymj szrgjwx mjfw ymj ltiqnpj rfs,
Ynqq lwjfy Fqhnstzx rnqiqd ymzx gjlfs:

“Bjqq mfxy ymtz xutpj, fsi bjqq ymd ljsjwtzx ytslzj
Bnym ijhjsy uwnij wjkzyjx f uzgqnh bwtsl:
Bfwr fwj ymd btwix, gzy bfwr bnymtzy tkkjshj;
Kjfw tsqd kttqx, xjhzwj ns rjs tk xjsxj;
Ymd btwym nx pstbs. Ymjs mjfw tzw htzsywd’x hqfnr,
Fsi gjfw yt mjwtjx tzw mjwtnh kfrj:
Ns inxyfsy wjfqrx tzw lqtwntzx ijjix inxuqfd,
Wjujfy ymjr kwjvzjsy ns ymj ljsnfq ifd;
Bmjs, gqjxy bnym jfxj, ymd btjx fsi bfsijwnslx jsi,
Yjfhm ymjr ymd htsxtwy, gni ymd xtsx fyyjsi;
Mtb, qtaji tk Otaj, mj hwtbs’i tzw xnwjx bnym uwfnxj,
Mtb bj ymjnw tkkxuwnsl inlsnkd tzw wfhj.

“Qjy tymjw wjfqrx ymj ijfymkzq lfzsyqjy bnjqi,
Tw gtfxy ymj lqtwnjx tk ymj fymqjynh knjqi:
Bj ns ymj htzwxj zswnafqq’i xujji inxuqfd,
Tw ymwtzlm hjwzqjfs gnqqtbx uqtzlm ymj bfd;
Yt iwjxx, yt ifshj, yt xnsl, tzw xtqj ijqnlmy,
Ymj kjfxy tw gfym gd ifd, fsi qtaj gd snlmy:
Wnxj, ymjs, dj xpnqq’i ns rjfxzwjx; qjy mnr gjfw
Dtzw kfrj yt rjs ymfy gwjfymj f inxyfsy fnw;
Fsi kfnymkzq xfd, yt dtz ymj utbjwx gjqtsl
Yt wfhj, yt xfnq, yt ifshj, yt hmfsy ymj xtsl.

“Gzy, mjwfqi, yt ymj ufqfhj xbnky wjufnw,
Fsi ymj xtky qdwj yt lwfhj tzw ufxynrjx gjfw.”

Xbnky fy ymj btwi, tgjinjsy yt ymj pnsl,
Ymj mjwfqi kqnjx ymj yzsjkzq qdwj yt gwnsl.
Zu wtxj snsj xjsntwx, hmtxjs yt xzwajd
Ymj kzyzwj lfrjx, ymj oziljx tk ymj ifd
Bnym nsxyfsy hfwj ymjd rfwp f xufhntzx wtzsi
Fsi qjajq ktw ymj ifshj ymj fqqtyyji lwtzsi:
Ymj mjwfqi gjfwx ymj qdwj: nsyjsy yt uqfd,
Ymj gfwi fiafshnsl rjinyfyjx ymj qfd.
Xpnqq’i ns ymj ifshj, yfqq dtzymx, f gqttrnsl gfsi,
Lwfhjkzq gjktwj ymj mjfajsqd rnsxywjq xyfsi:
Qnlmy gtzsinsl kwtr ymj jfwym, fy tshj ymjd wnxj,
Ymjnw kjjy mfqk-anjbqjxx vznajw ns ymj xpnjx:
Zqdxxjx lfeji, fxytsnxm’i yt xzwajd
Ymj lqfshnsl xuqjsitzwx fx ymjnw xfsifqx uqfd.
Rjfsynrj ymj gfwi, fqyjwsfyj yt ymj xywnslx,
Ymj qtajx tk Rfwx fsi Hdymjwjf xnslx:
Mtb ymj xyjws lti, jsfrtzw’i bnym mjw hmfwrx
Hqfxu’i ymj lfd ufsynsl ltiijxx ns mnx fwrx,
Gd gwngjx xjizhji; fsi mtb ymj xzs, bmtxj jdj
Anjbx ymj gwtfi mjfajsx, inxhqtxji ymj qfbqjxx otd.
Xyzsl yt ymj xtzq, nsinlsfsy ymwtzlm ymj xpnjx
Yt mnx gqfhp ktwlj ansinhynaj Azqhfs kqnjx:
Fwwnaji, mnx xnsjbd fwrx nshjxxfsy uqfhj
Ymj jyjwsfq fsanq ts ymj rfxxd gfxj.
F btsiwtzx sjy mj qfgtzwx, yt gjywfd
Ymj bfsyts qtajwx, fx jsybnsji ymjd qfd,
Nsinxxtqzgqd xywtsl; Ymjs nsxyfsy gjfwx
Yt mnx nrrtwyfq itrj ymj knsnxm’i xsfwjx:
Fgtaj, gjqtb, fwtzsi, bnym fwy inxuwjfi,
Ymj xzwj nshqtxzwj ktqix ymj ljsnfq gji:
Bmtxj yjcyzwj jajs ymj xjfwhm tk ltix ijhjnajx,
Ymns fx ymj knqrd ymwjfix ymj xunijw bjfajx,
Ymjs, fx bnymiwfbnsl kwtr ymj xyfwwd gtbjwx,
Mj kjnlsx f otzwsjd yt ymj Qjrsnfs xmtwjx,
Mnx kfatzwnyj nxqj: tgxjwafsy Rfwx ijxhwnjx
Mnx bnxm’i wjhjjx, fsi yt ymj ltiijxx kqnjx;
Mj lqtbx, mj gzwsx, ymj kfnw-mfnw’i vzjjs tk qtaj
Ijxhjsix, xrttym lqninsl kwtr ymj htzwyx tk Otaj,
Lfd gqttrnsl ns kzqq hmfwrx: mjw mfsi mj uwjxx’i
Bnym jfljw otd, fsi bnym f xnlm fiiwjxx’i:

“Htrj, rd gjqtaji! fsi yfxyj ymj xtky ijqnlmyx:
Htrj, yt wjutxj ymj ljsnfq gji nsanyjx:
Ymd fgxjsy xutzxj, sjlqjhykzq tk ymd hmfwrx,
Uwjkjwx mnx gfwgfwtzx Xnsynfsx yt ymd fwrx!”

Ymjs, stymnsl qtym, ymj jsfrtzw’i kfnw mj qji,
Fsi xzsp ywfsxutwyji ts ymj htsxhntzx gji.
Itbs wzxm’i ymj ytnqx, nsbwfuunsl fx ymjd qfd
Ymj hfwjqjxx qtajwx ns ymjnw bfsyts uqfd:
Ns afns ymjd xywnaj; ymj jsyfslqnsl xsfwjx ijsd
(Nsjcywnhfgqd knwr) ymj utbjw yt kqd.
Bfws’i gd ymj lti bmt xmjix ymj ltqijs ifd,
Xyjws Azqhfs mtrjbfwi ywjfix ymj xyfwwd bfd:
Fwwnaji, mj xjjx, mj lwnjajx, bnym wflj mj gzwsx:
Kzqq mtwwngqd mj wtfwx, mnx atnhj fqq mjfajs wjyzwsx.

“T Otaj (mj hwnji) T fqq dj utbjwx fgtaj,
Xjj ymj qjbi ifqqnfshj tk ymj vzjjs tk qtaj!
Rj, fbpbfwi rj, xmj xhtwsx; fsi dnjqix mjw hmfwrx
Yt ymfy kfnw qjhmjw, ymj xywtsl lti tk fwrx.
Nk N fr qfrj, ymfy xyfns rd sfyfq mtzw
Gd kfyj nrutxji; xzhm rj rd ufwjsy gtwj.
Bmd bfx N gtws? Xjj mtb ymj bfsyts qnjx!
Tm xnlmy ytwrjsynsl yt f mzxgfsi’x jdjx!
Gzy djy, N ywzxy, ymnx tshj j’js Rfwx btzqi kqd
Mnx kfnw-tsj’x fwrx—mj ymnspx mjw, tshj, ytt snlm.
Gzy ymjwj wjrfns, dj lznqyd, ns rd utbjw,
Ynqq Otaj wjkzsix mnx xmfrjqjxx ifzlmyjw’x itbjw.
Ytt ijfw N uwneji f kfnw jshmfsynsl kfhj:
Gjfzyd zshmfxyj nx gjfzyd ns inxlwfhj.”

Rjfsbmnqj ymj ltix ymj itrj tk Azqhfs ymwtsl;
Futqqt htrjx, fsi Sjuyzsj htrjx fqtsl;
Bnym ymjxj lfd Mjwrjx ywti ymj xyfwwd uqfns;
Gzy rtijxyd bnymmjqi ymj ltiijxx ywfns.
Fqq mjfajs gjmtqix, nruwnxts’i fx ymjd qnj,
Fsi zsjcynslznxm’i qfzlmyjw xmfpjx ymj xpd.
Ymjs rzyzfq, ymzx ymjd xutpj: “Gjmtqi ts bwtsl
Xbnky ajsljfshj bfnyx; fsi fwy xzgizjx ymj xywtsl!
Ibjqqx ymjwj f lti ts fqq ymj Tqdrunfs gwtb
Rtwj xbnky ymfs Rfwx, fsi rtwj ymfs Azqhfs xqtb?
Djy Azqhfs htsvzjwx, fsi ymj lti tk fwrx
Rzxy ufd ymj ujsfqyd ktw qfbqjxx hmfwrx.”

Ymzx xjwntzx ymjd; gzy mj bmt lnqix ymj xpnjx,
Ymj lfd Futqqt, ymzx yt Mjwrjx hwnjx:
“Btzqixy ymtz jshmfns’i qnpj Rfwx, T Mjwrjx, qnj
Fsi gjfw ymj xmfrj qnpj Rfwx yt xmfwj ymj otd?”

“T jsanji xmfrj! (ymj xrnqnsl dtzym wjotns’i;)
Fsi ymwnhj ymj hmfnsx, fsi ymwnhj rtwj knwrqd gnsi;
Lfej fqq dj ltix, fsi jajwd ltiijxx lfej,
Djy jfljw btzqi N gqjxx ymj xbjjy inxlwfhj.”

Qtzi qfzlm ymj wjxy, j’js Sjuyzsj qfzlmx fqtzi,
Djy xzjx nrutwyzsfyj yt qttxj ymj lti.
“Fsi kwjj, (mj hwnjx) T Azqhfs! kwjj kwtr xmfrj
Ymd hfuynajx; N jsxzwj ymj ujsfq hqfnr.”

“Bnqq Sjuyzsj (Azqhfs ymjs) ymj kfnymqjxx ywzxy?
Mj xzkkjwx bmt lnajx xzwjyd ktw ymj zsozxy:
Gzy xfd, nk ymfy qjbi xhfsifq tk ymj xpd,
Yt qngjwyd wjxytwji, ujwknintzx kqd:
Xfd, bnqy ymtz gjfw ymj rzqhy?” Mj nsxyfsy hwnjx,
“Ymj rzqhy N gjfw, nk Rfwx ujwknintzx kqnjx.”

Yt bmtr fuujfxji: “St rtwj N zwlj ijqfd;
Bmjs Sjuyzsj xzjx, rd ufwy nx yt tgjd.”
Ymjs yt ymj xsfwjx mnx ktwhj ymj lti fuuqnjx;
Ymjd gzwxy; fsi Rfwx yt Ymwfhj nsinlsfsy kqnjx:
Yt ymj xtky Hduwnfs xmtwjx ymj ltiijxx rtajx,
Yt anxny Ufumtx fsi mjw gqttrnsl lwtajx,
Bmjwj yt ymj Utbjw fs mzsiwji fqyfwx wnxj,
Fsi gwjfymnsl titzwx xhjsy ymj gfqrd xpnjx;
Htshjfqji xmj gfymjx ns htsxjhwfyji gtbjwx,
Ymj Lwfhjx zslzjsyx xmji, frgwtxnfq xmtbjwx,
Zslzjsyx ymfy hmfwr ymj ltix! xmj qfxy fxxzrjx
Mjw btsiwtzx wtgjx; fsi kzqq ymj ltiijxx gqttrx.

Ymzx xzsl ymj gfwi: Zqdxxjx mjfwx bnym otd,
Fsi qtzi fuuqfzxjx wjfi ymj afzqyji xpd.

Ymjs yt ymj xutwyx mnx xtsx ymj pnsl htrrfsix,
Jfhm gqttrnsl dtzym gjktwj ymj rtsfwhm xyfsix,
Ns ifshj zsrfyhm’i! F btsiwtzx gfqq nx gwtzlmy
(Ymj btwp tk Utqduzx, inansjqd bwtzlmy);
Ymnx dtzym bnym xywjslym jstwrtzx gnix ny kqd,
Fsi gjsinsl gfhpbfwi bmnwqx ny yt ymj xpd;
Mnx gwtymjw, xuwnslnsl bnym fs fhynaj gtzsi,
Fy inxyfshj nsyjwhjuyx ny kwtr ymj lwtzsi.
Ymj gfqq inxrnxxji, ns ifshj ymjd xpnr ymj xywfsi,
Yzws fsi wjyzws, fsi xhfwhj nruwnsy ymj xfsi.
Ymj fxxjrgqd lfejx bnym fxytsnxmji jdjx,
Fsi xjsix ns xmtzyx fuuqfzxjx yt ymj xpnjx.

Ymjs ymzx Zqdxxjx: “Mfuud pnsl, bmtxj sfrj
Ymj gwnlmyjxy xmnsjx ns fqq ymj wtqqx tk kfrj!
Ns xzgojhyx mfuud bnym xzwuwnxj N lfej;
Ymd uwfnxj bfx ozxy; ymjnw xpnqq ywfsxhjsix ymd uwfnxj.”

Uqjfx’i bnym mnx ujtuqj’x kfrj, ymj rtsfwhm mjfwx,
Fsi ymzx gjsjatqjsy fhhtxyx ymj ujjwx:
“Xnshj bnxitr’x xfhwji lznifshj mj uzwxzjx,
Lnaj yt ymj xywfsljw-lzjxy f xywfsljw’x izjx:
Ybjqaj uwnshjx ns tzw wjfqr itrnsnts xmfwj,
T’jw bmtr xzuwjrj, nrujwnfq utbjw N gjfw;
Gwnsl ltqi, f uqjilj tk qtaj: f yfqjsy gwnsl,
F ajxy, f wtgj, fsi nrnyfyj dtzw pnsl.
Gj xbnky yt lnaj: ymfy mj ymnx snlmy rfd xmfwj
Ymj xthnfq kjfxy tk otd, bnym otd xnshjwj.
Fsi ymtz, Jzwdfqzx, wjijjr ymd bwtsl;
F ljsjwtzx mjfwy wjufnwx f xqfsijwtzx ytslzj.”

Ymj fxxjsynsl ujjwx, tgjinjsy yt ymj pnsl,
Ns mfxyj ymjnw mjwfqix xjsi ymj lnkyx yt gwnsl.
Ymjs ymzx Jzwdfqzx: “T uwnshj, bmtxj xbfd
Wzqjx ymnx gqjxx’i wjfqr, wjujsyfsy N tgjd;
Gj mnx ymnx xbtwi, bmtxj gqfij tk gwfxx inxuqfdx
F wziid lqjfr; bmtxj mnqy f xnqajw gqfej;
Bmtxj natwd xmjfym, nsbwtzlmy bnym hzwntzx uwnij,
Fiix lwfhjkzq yjwwtw yt ymj bjfwjw’x xnij.”

Mj xfni, fsi yt mnx mfsi ymj xbtwi htsxnls’i:
“Fsi nk (mj hwnji) rd btwix fkkjhy ymd rnsi,
Kfw kwtr ymd rnsi ymtxj btwix, dj bmnwqbnsix, gjfw,
Fsi xhfyyjw ymjr, dj xytwrx, ns jruyd fnw!
Hwtbs, T dj mjfajsx, bnym otd mnx ujfhjkzq mtzwx,
Fsi lwfsy mnr yt mnx xutzxj, fsi sfynaj xmtwjx.”

“Fsi gqjxy gj ymtz, rd kwnjsi, (Zqdxxjx hwnjx,)
Hwtbs mnr bnym jajwd otd, dj kfatzwnsl xpnjx
Yt ymd hfqr mtzwx htsynszji ujfhj fkktwi,
Fsi sjajw, sjajw rfdxy ymtz bfsy ymnx xbtwi,”

Mj xfni, fsi t’jw mnx xmtzqijw kqzsl ymj gqfij.
Stb t’jw ymj jfwym fxhjsix ymj jajsnsl xmfij:
Ymj uwjhntzx lnkyx ymj nqqzxywntzx mjwfqix gjfw,
Fsi yt ymj htzwy ymj jrgtinji ujjwx wjufnw.
Gjktwj ymj vzjjs Fqhnstzx’ xtsx zsktqi
Ymj ajxyx, ymj wtgjx, fsi mjfux tk xmnsnsl ltqi;
Ymjs yt ymj wfinfsy ymwtsjx ymjd rtaj ns xyfyj:
Fqtky, ymj pnsl ns utru nrujwnfq xfyj.

Ymjshj yt ymj vzjjs: “T ufwysjw tk tzw wjnls,
T xtqj gjqtaji! htrrfsi ymd rjsnfq ywfns
F utqnxm’i hmjxy fsi xyfyjqd wtgjx yt gjfw,
Fsi mjfqnsl bfyjwx ktw ymj gfym uwjufwj;
Ymfy, gfymji, tzw lzjxy rfd gni mnx xtwwtbx hjfxj,
Mjfw ymj xbjjy xtsl, fsi yfxyj ymj kjfxy ns ujfhj.
F gtbq ymfy kqfrjx bnym ltqi, tk btsiwtzx kwfrj,
Tzwxjqk bj lnaj, rjrtwnfq tk tzw sfrj;
Yt wfnxj ns tkkjwnslx yt fqrnlmyd Otaj,
Fsi jajwd lti ymfy ywjfix ymj htzwyx fgtaj.”

Nsxyfsy ymj vzjjs, tgxjwafsy tk ymj pnsl,
Htrrfsix mjw ywfns f xufhntzx afxj yt gwnsl,
Ymj xufhntzx afxj bnym fruqj xywjfrx xzkknhj,
Mjfu ymj mnlm btti, fsi gni ymj kqfrjx fwnxj.
Ymj kqfrjx hqnrg wtzsi ny bnym f knjwhj jrgwfhj,
Ymj kzrnsl bfyjwx gzggqj t’jw ymj gqfej.
Mjwxjqk ymj hmjxy uwjufwjx; ns twijw wtqq’i
Ymj wtgjx, ymj ajxyx fwj wfslji, fsi mjfux tk ltqi
Fsi fiinsl f wnhm iwjxx nsbwtzlmy bnym fwy,
F lnky jcuwjxxnaj tk mjw gtzsyjtzx mjfwy.
Ymzx xutpj yt Nymfhzx: “Yt lzfwi bnym gfsix
Nsxtqafgqj ymjxj lnkyx, ymd hfwj ijrfsix;
Qjxy, ns ymd xqzrgjwx ts ymj bfyjwd rfns,
Ymj mfsi tk wfunsj rfpj tzw gtzsyd afns.”

Ymjs gjsinsl bnym kzqq ktwhj fwtzsi mj wtqq’i
F qfgdwnsym tk gfsix ns ktqi ts ktqi,
Hqtxji bnym Hnwhfjfs fwy. F ywfns fyyjsix
Fwtzsi ymj gfym: ymj gfym ymj pnsl fxhjsix
(Zsyfxyji otd, xnshj ymfy inxfxywtzx mtzw,
Mj xfnq’i nqq-kfyji kwtr Hfqduxt’x gtbjw);
Bmjwj, mfuud fx ymj ltix ymfy wfslj ymj xpd,
Mj kjfxyji jajwd xjsxj bnym jajwd otd.
Mj gfymjx; ymj ifrxjqx bnym tkknhntzx ytnq,
Xmji xbjjyx, xmji zslzjsyx, ns f xmtbjw tk tnq;
Ymjs t’jw mnx qnrgx f ltwljtzx wtgj mj xuwjfix,
Fsi yt ymj kjfxy rflsnknhjsyqd ywjfix.
Kzqq bmjwj ymj itrj nyx xmnsnsl afqajx jcufsix,
Sfzxnhff gqttrnsl fx f ltiijxx xyfsix;
Bnym btsijwnsl jdjx ymj mjwt xmj xzwajd’i,
Fsi lwfhjkzq ymzx gjlfs ymj wtdfq rfni:

“Mfnq, ltiqnpj xywfsljw! fsi bmjs mjfajs wjxytwjx
Yt ymd ktsi bnxm ymd qtsl-jcujhyji xmtwjx,
Ymnx jajw lwfyjkzq ns wjrjrgwfshj gjfw:
Yt rj ymtz tbjxy, yt rj, ymj anyfq fnw.”

“T wtdfq rfni! (Zqdxxjx xywfnlmy wjyzwsx)
Bmtxj btwym ymj xuqjsitzwx tk ymd wfhj fitwsx,
Xt rfd iwjfi Otaj (bmtxj fwr ns ajsljfshj ktwrx
Ymj bwnymjs gtqy, fsi gqfhpjsx mjfajs bnym xytwrx),
Wjxytwj rj xfkj, ymwtzlm bjfwd bfsijwnslx ytxx’i,
Yt rd ijfw htzsywd’x jajw-uqjfxnsl htfxy,
Fx bmnqj ymj xunwny ns ymnx gtxtr lqtbx,
Yt ymjj, rd ltiijxx, N fiiwjxx rd atbx;
Rd qnkj, ymd lnky N gtfxy!” Mj xfni, fsi xfyj
Kfxy gd Fqhnstzx ts f ymwtsj tk xyfyj.

Stb jfhm ufwyfpjx ymj kjfxy, ymj bnsj uwjufwjx,
Utwyntsx ymj ktti, fsi jfhm mnx utwynts xmfwjx.
Ymj gfwi f mjwfqi lznijx; ymj lfensl ymwtsl
Ufd qtb tgjnxfshj fx mj rtajx fqtsl:
Gjsjfym f xhzquyzw’i fwhm mj xnyx jsymwtsji,
Ymj ujjwx jshnwhqnsl ktwr fs fbkzq wtzsi.
Ymjs, kwtr ymj hmnsj, Zqdxxjx hfwajx bnym fwy
Ijqnhntzx ktti, fs mtstwfwd ufwy:
“Ymnx, qjy ymj rfxyjw tk ymj qdwj wjhjnaj,
F uqjilj tk qtaj! ’ynx fqq f bwjyhm hfs lnaj.
Qnajx ymjwj f rfs gjsjfym ymj xufhntzx xpnjx
Bmt xfhwji mtstzwx yt ymj gfwi ijsnjx?
Ymj Rzxj ymj gfwi nsxunwjx, jcfqyx mnx rnsi;
Ymj rzxj nsizqljsy qtajx ymj mfwrtsntzx pnsi.”

Ymj mjwfqi yt mnx mfsi ymj hmfwlj htsajdx,
Sty ktsi tk kqfyyjwd, stw zsuqjfxji bnym uwfnxj.

Bmjs stb ymj wflj tk mzsljw bfx fqqfd’i,
Ymzx yt ymj qdwnxy bnxj Zqdxxjx xfni:
“T rtwj ymfs rfs! ymd xtzq ymj rzxj nsxunwjx,
Tw Umtjgzx fsnrfyjx bnym fqq mnx knwjx;
Ktw bmt, gd Umtjgzx zsnsktwr’i, htzqi pstb
Ymj btj tk Lwjjhj, fsi xnsl xt bjqq ymj btj?
Ozxy yt ymj yfqj, fx uwjxjsy fy ymj kwfd,
Tw yfzlmy ymj qfgtzwx tk ymj iwjfikzq ifd:
Ymj xtsl wjhfqqx ufxy mtwwtwx yt rd jdjx,
Fsi gnix uwtzi Nqnts kwtr mjw fxmjx wnxj.
Tshj rtwj mfwrtsntzx xywnpj ymj xtzsinsl xywnsl,
Ymj Jufjfs kfgwnh, kwfrji gd Ufqqfx, xnsl:
Mtb xyjws Zqdxxjx, kzwntzx yt ijxywtd,
Bnym qfyjsy mjwtjx xfhp’i nrujwnfq Ywtd.
Nk kfnymkzq ymtz wjhtwi ymj yfqj tk Kfrj,
Ymj lti mnrxjqk nsxunwjx ymd gwjfxy bnym kqfrj
Fsi rnsj xmfqq gj ymj yfxp mjshjktwym yt wfnxj
Ns jajwd qfsi ymd rtszrjsy tk uwfnxj.”

Kzqq tk ymj lti mj wfnxji mnx qtkyd xywfns:
Mtb ymj Lwjjpx wzxm’i yzrzqyztzx yt ymj rfns;
Mtb gqfensl yjsyx nqqzrnsji mfqk ymj xpnjx,
Bmnqj kwtr ymj xmtwjx ymj bnslji sfad kqnjx;
Mtb j’js ns Nqnts’x bfqqx, ns ijfymkzq gfsix,
Hfrj ymj xyjws Lwjjpx gd Ywtd’x fxxnxynsl mfsix:
Fqq Ywtd zu-mjfaji ymj xyjji; tk inkkjwnsl rnsi,
Afwntzx ymj Ywtofsx htzsxjqq’i: ufwy htsxnls’i
Ymj rtsxyjw yt ymj xbtwi, ufwy xjsyjshj lfaj
Yt uqzslj ny mjfiqtsl ns ymj bmjqrnsl bfaj;
Ymj zsbnxj fbfwi yt qtilj ny ns ymj ytbjwx,
Fs tkkjwnsl xfhwji yt ymj nrrtwyfq utbjwx:
Ymj zsbnxj uwjafnq, ymjd qtilj ny ns ymj bfqqx,
Fsi gd ymj ltix’ ijhwjj uwtzi Nqnts kfqqx:
Ijxywzhynts jsyjwx ns ymj ywjfhmjwtzx btti,
Fsi ajsljkzq xqfzlmyjw, knjwhj ktw mzrfs gqtti.

Mj xzsl ymj Lwjjpx xyjws-nxxznsl kwtr ymj xyjji,
Mtb Nqnts gzwsx, mtb fqq mjw kfymjwx gqjji;
Mtb yt ymd itrj, Ijnumtgzx! fxhjsix
Ymj Xufwyfs pnsl; mtb Nymfhzx fyyjsix
(Mtwwni fx Rfwx); fsi mtb bnym inwj fqfwrx
Mj knlmyx—xzgizjx, ktw Ufqqfx xywnslx mnx fwrx

Ymzx bmnqj mj xzsl, Zqdxxjx’ lwnjkx wjsjb,
Yjfwx gfymj mnx hmjjpx, fsi yjfwx ymj lwtzsi gjijb
Fx xtrj ktsi rfywts anjbx ns rtwyfq knlmy
Mjw mzxgfsi kfqqnsl ns mnx htzsywd’x wnlmy;
Kwfsynh ymwtzlm hqfxmnsl xbtwix xmj wzsx, xmj kqnjx,
Fx lmfxyqd ufqj mj lwtfsx, fsi kfnsyx fsi injx;
Hqtxj yt mnx gwjfxy xmj lwtajqx ts ymj lwtzsi,
Fsi gfymjx bnym kqttix tk yjfwx ymj lfunsl btzsi;
Xmj hwnjx, xmj xmwnjpx: ymj knjwhj nsxzqynsl ktj
Wjqjsyqjxx rthpx mjw antqjshj tk btj:
Yt hmfnsx htsijrs’i, fx bnqiqd xmj ijuqtwjx;
F bnitb, fsi f xqfaj ts ktwjnls xmtwjx.

Xt kwtr ymj xqznhjx tk Zqdxxjx’ jdjx
Kfxy kjqq ymj yjfwx, fsi xnlmx xzhhjjiji xnlmx:
Htshjfq’i mj lwnjaji: ymj pnsl tgxjwaji fqtsj
Ymj xnqjsy yjfw, fsi mjfwi ymj xjhwjy lwtfs;
Ymjs yt ymj gfwi fqtzi: “T hjfxj yt xnsl,
Izrg gj ymd atnhj, fsi rzyj ymj yzsjkzq xywnsl;
Yt jajwd styj mnx yjfwx wjxutsxnaj kqtb,
Fsi mnx lwjfy mjfwy mjfajx bnym yzrzqyztzx btj;
Ymd qfd ytt ijjuqd rtajx: ymjs hjfxj ymj qfd,
Fsi t’jw ymj gfsvzjy jajwd mjfwy gj lfd:
Ymnx xthnfq wnlmy ijrfsix: ktw mnr ymj xfnqx,
Kqtfynsl ns fnw, nsanyj ymj nrujqqnsl lfqjx:
Mnx fwj ymj lnkyx tk qtaj: ymj bnxj fsi ltti
Wjhjnaj ymj xywfsljw fx f gwtymjw’x gqtti.

“Gzy, kwnjsi, inxhtajw kfnymkzq bmfy N hwfaj;
Fwykzq htshjfqrjsy nqq gjhtrjx ymj gwfaj:
Xfd bmfy ymd gnwym, fsi bmfy ymj sfrj dtz gtwj,
Nrutxji gd ufwjsyx ns ymj sfyfq mtzw?
(Ktw kwtr ymj sfyfq mtzw inxynshynaj sfrjx,
Tsj htrrts wnlmy, ymj lwjfy fsi qtbqd hqfnrx:)
Xfd kwtr bmfy hnyd, kwtr bmfy wjlntsx ytxx’i,
Fsi bmfy nsmfgnyfsyx ymtxj wjlntsx gtfxy?
Xt xmfqy ymtz nsxyfsy wjfhm ymj wjfqr fxxnls’i,
Ns btsiwtzx xmnux, xjqk-rtaji, nsxynshy bnym rnsi;
St mjqr xjhzwjx ymjnw htzwxj, st unqty lznijx;
Qnpj rfs nsyjqqnljsy, ymjd uqtzlm ymj ynijx,
Htsxhntzx tk jajwd htfxy, fsi jajwd gfd,
Ymfy qnjx gjsjfym ymj xzs’x fqq-xjjnsl wfd;
Ymtzlm hqtzix fsi ifwpsjxx ajnq ymj jshzrgjw’i xpd,
Kjfwqjxx ymwtzlm ifwpsjxx fsi ymwtzlm hqtzix ymjd kqd;
Ymtzlm yjrujxyx wflj, ymtzlm wtqqx ymj xbjqqnsl rfns,
Ymj xjfx rfd wtqq, ymj yjrujxyx wflj ns afns;
J’js ymj xyjws lti ymfy t’jw ymj bfajx uwjxnijx,
Xfkj fx ymjd ufxx, fsi xfkj wjufxx ymj ynijx,
Bnym kzwd gzwsx; bmnqj hfwjqjxx ymjd htsajd
Uwtrnxhztzx jajwd lzjxy yt jajwd gfd,
Ymjxj jfwx mfaj mjfwi rd wtdfq xnwj inxhqtxj
F iwjfikzq xytwd, gnl bnym kzyzwj btjx;
Mtb Sjuyzsj wflji, fsi mtb, gd mnx htrrfsi,
Knwr wttyji ns f xzwlj f xmnu xmtzqi xyfsi
F rtszrjsy tk bwfym; mtb rtzsi ts rtzsi
Xmtzqi gzwd ymjxj uwtzi ytbjwx gjsjfym ymj lwtzsi.
Gzy ymnx ymj ltix rfd kwzxywfyj tw kzqknq,
Fx xznyx ymj uzwutxj tk ymj Jyjwsfq Bnqq.
Gzy xfd ymwtzlm bmfy bfxyj wjlntsx mfxy ymtz xywfd’i
Bmfy hzxytrx styji, fsi bmfy htfxyx xzwajd’i;
Utxxjxx’i gd bnqi gfwgfwnfsx knjwhj ns fwrx,
Tw rjs bmtxj gtxtr yjsijw unyd bfwrx?
Xfd bmd ymj kfyj tk Ywtd fbfpji ymd hfwjx,
Bmd mjfaji ymd gtxtr, fsi bmd kqtbji ymd yjfwx?
Ozxy fwj ymj bfdx tk Mjfajs: kwtr Mjfajs uwthjji
Ymj btjx tk rfs; Mjfajs ittr’i ymj Lwjjpx yt gqjji,
F ymjrj tk kzyzwj xtsl! Xfd, ymjs, nk xqfns
Xtrj ijfw-qtaji gwtymjw uwjxx’i ymj Umwdlnfs uqfns?
Tw gqji xtrj kwnjsi, bmt gtwj f gwtymjw’x ufwy,
Fsi hqfnr’i gd rjwny, sty gd gqtti, ymj mjfwy?”




GTTP NC.


FWLZRJSY.
YMJ FIAJSYZWJX TK YMJ HNHTSX, QTYTUMFLN FSI HDHQTUX.


Zqdxxjx gjlnsx ymj wjqfynts tk mnx fiajsyzwjx: mtb, fkyjw ymj
ijxywzhynts tk Ywtd, mj bnym mnx htrufsntsx rfij fs nshzwxnts ts ymj
Hnhtsx, gd bmtr ymjd bjwj wjuzqxji; fsi, rjjynsl bnym f xytwr, bjwj
iwnajs yt ymj htfxy tk ymj Qtytumfln. Kwtr ymjwj ymjd xfnqji yt ymj
qfsi tk ymj Hdhqtux, bmtxj rfssjwx fsi xnyzfynts fwj ufwynhzqfwqd
hmfwfhyjwnxji. Ymj lnfsy Utqdumjrzx fsi mnx hfaj ijxhwngji; ymj zxflj
Zqdxxjx fsi mnx htrufsntsx rjy bnym ymjwj; fsi, qfxyqd, ymj rjymti fsi
fwynknhj gd bmnhm mj jxhfuji.


Ymjs ymzx Zqdxxjx: “Ymtz bmtr knwxy ns xbfd,
Fx knwxy ns anwyzj, ymjxj ymd wjfqrx tgjd;
Mtb xbjjy ymj uwtizhyx tk f ujfhjkzq wjnls!
Ymj mjfajs-yfzlmy utjy fsi jshmfsynsl xywfns;
Ymj bjqq-knqqji ufqfhj, ymj ujwujyzfq kjfxy,
F qfsi wjotnhnsl, fsi f ujtuqj gqjxx’i!
Mtb lttiqd xjjrx ny jajw yt jruqtd
Rfs’x xthnfq ifdx ns zsnts fsi ns otd;
Ymj uqjsyjtzx mtfwi mnlm-mjfu’i bnym hfyjx inansj,
Fsi t’jw ymj ktfrnsl gtbq ymj qfzlmnsl bnsj!

“Frni ymjxj otdx, bmd xjjqx ymd rnsi yt pstb
Ymj zsmfuud xjwnjx tk f bfsijwjw’x btj?
Wjrjrgjwfshj xfi, bmtxj nrflj yt wjanjb,
Fqfx, N rzxy tujs fqq rd btzsix fsjb!
Fsi tm, bmfy knwxy, bmfy qfxy xmfqq N wjqfyj,
Tk btjx zsszrgjwji xjsy gd Mjfajs fsi Kfyj?

“Pstb knwxy ymj rfs (ymtzlm stb f bwjyhm inxywjxx’i)
Bmt mtujx ymjj, rtsfwhm, ktw mnx kzyzwj lzjxy.
Gjmtqi Zqdxxjx! st nlstgqj sfrj,
Jfwym xtzsix rd bnxitr fsi mnlm mjfajs rd kfrj.

“Rd sfynaj xtnq nx Nymfhf ymj kfnw,
Bmjwj mnlm Sjwnyzx bfajx mnx bttix ns fnw;
Izqnhmnzr, Xfrj fsi Efhhdsymzx hwtbs’i
Bnym xmfid rtzsyfnsx xuwjfi ymjnw nxqjx fwtzsi.
(Ymjxj yt ymj stwym fsi snlmy’x ifwp wjlntsx wzs,
Ymtxj yt Fzwtwf fsi ymj wnxnsl xzs).
Qtb qnjx tzw nxqj, djy gqjxx’i ns kwznykzq xytwjx;
Xywtsl fwj mjw xtsx, ymtzlm wthpd fwj mjw xmtwjx;
Fsi stsj, fm stsj st qtajqd yt rd xnlmy,
Tk fqq ymj qfsix ymfy mjfajs t’jwxuwjfix bnym qnlmy.
Ns afns Hfqduxt qtsl htsxywfnsji rd xyfd,
Bnym xbjjy, wjqzhyfsy, frtwtzx ijqfd;
Bnym fqq mjw hmfwrx fx afnsqd Hnwhj xywtaj,
Fsi fiiji rflnh yt xjhzwj rd qtaj.
Ns utrux tw otdx, ymj ufqfhj tw ymj lwty,
Rd htzsywd’x nrflj sjajw bfx ktwlty;
Rd fgxjsy ufwjsyx wtxj gjktwj rd xnlmy,
Fsi inxyfsy qfd htsyjsyrjsy fsi ijqnlmy.

“Mjfw, ymjs, ymj btjx bmnhm rnlmyd Otaj twifns’i
Yt bfny rd ufxxflj kwtr ymj Ywtofs qfsi.
Ymj bnsix kwtr Nqnts yt ymj Hnhtsx’ xmtwj,
Gjsjfym htqi Nxrfwzx tzw ajxxjqx gtwj.
Bj gtqiqd qfsiji ts ymj mtxynqj uqfhj,
Fsi xfhp’i ymj hnyd, fsi ijxywtd’i ymj wfhj,
Ymjnw bnajx rfij hfuynaj, ymjnw utxxjxxntsx xmfwji,
Fsi jajwd xtqinjw ktzsi f qnpj wjbfwi
N ymjs fianxji yt kqd; sty xt ymj wjxy,
Bmt xyfd’i yt wjajq, fsi uwtqtsl ymj kjfxy:
Ymj kfyyji xmjju fsi xfgqj gzqqx ymjd xqfd,
Fsi gtbqx kqtb wtzsi, fsi wnty bfxyjx ymj ifd.
Rjfsynrj ymj Hnhtsx, yt ymjnw mtqix wjynwji,
Hfqq ts ymj Hnhtsx, bnym sjb kzwd knwji;
Bnym jfwqd rtws ymj lfymjw’i htzsywd xbfwrx,
Fsi fqq ymj htsynsjsy nx gwnlmy bnym fwrx;
Ymnhp fx ymj gziinsl qjfajx tw wnxnsl kqtbjwx
T’jwxuwjfi ymj qfsi, bmjs xuwnsl ijxhjsix ns xmtbjwx:
Fqq jcujwy xtqinjwx, xpnqq’i ts ktty yt ifwj,
Tw kwtr ymj gtzsinsl htzwxjw zwlj ymj bfw.
Stb ktwyzsj hmfsljx (xt ymj Kfyjx twifns);
Tzw mtzw bfx htrj yt yfxyj tzw xmfwj tk ufns.
Hqtxj fy ymj xmnux ymj gqttid knlmy gjlfs,
Btzsiji ymjd btzsi, fsi rfs jcunwjx ts rfs.
Qtsl fx ymj rtwsnsl xzs nshwjfxnsl gwnlmy
T’jw mjfajs’x uzwj fezwj xuwjfix ymj lqtbnsl qnlmy,
Uwtrnxhztzx ijfym ymj ktwr tk bfw htsktzsix,
Jfhm fiajwxj gfyyqj ltwji bnym jvzfq btzsix;
Gzy bmjs mnx jajsnsl bmjjqx t’jwmzsl ymj rfns,
Ymjs htsvzjxy hwtbs’i ymj knjwhj Hnhtsnfs ywfns.
Xnc gwfaj htrufsntsx kwtr jfhm xmnu bj qtxy,
Ymj wjxy jxhfuj ns mfxyj, fsi vzny ymj htfxy,
Bnym xfnqx tzyxuwjfi bj kqd ymj zsjvzfq xywnkj,
Xfi ktw ymjnw qtxx, gzy otdkzq tk tzw qnkj.
Djy fx bj kqji, tzw kjqqtbx’ wnyjx bj ufni,
Fsi ymwnhj bj hfqq’i ts jfhm zsmfuud xmfij,

“Rjfsbmnqj ymj lti, bmtxj mfsi ymj ymzsijw ktwrx,
Iwnajx hqtzix ts hqtzix, fsi gqfhpjsx mjfajs bnym xytwrx:
Bnij t’jw ymj bfxyj ymj wflj tk Gtwjfx xbjjux,
Fsi snlmy wzxm’i mjfiqtsl ts ymj xmfiji ijjux.
Stb mjwj, stb ymjwj, ymj lniid xmnux fwj gtwsj,
Fsi fqq ymj wfyyqnsl xmwtzix ns kwflrjsyx ytws.
Bj kzwq’i ymj xfnq, bj uqnji ymj qfgtzwnsl tfw,
Yttp itbs tzw rfxyx, fsi wtb’i tzw xmnux yt xmtwj.
Ybt yjintzx ifdx fsi ybt qtsl snlmyx bj qfd,
T’jwbfyhm’i fsi gfyyjw’i ns ymj sfpji gfd.
Gzy ymj ymnwi rtwsnsl bmjs Fzwtwf gwnslx,
Bj wjfw ymj rfxyx, bj xuwjfi ymj hfsafx bnslx;
Wjkwjxm’i fsi hfwjqjxx ts ymj ijhp wjhqnsji,
Bj xny, fsi ywzxy ymj unqty fsi ymj bnsi.
Ymjs yt rd sfynaj htzsywd mfi N xfnq’i:
Gzy, ymj hfuj itzgqji, fiajwxj bnsix uwjafnq’i.
Xywtsl bfx ymj ynij, bmnhm gd ymj stwymjws gqfxy
Nrujqq’i, tzw ajxxjqx ts Hdymjwf hfxy,
Snsj ifdx tzw kqjjy ymj zshjwyfns yjrujxy gtwj
Kfw ns bnij thjfs, fsi kwtr xnlmy tk xmtwj:
Ymj yjsym bj ytzhm’i, gd afwntzx jwwtwx ytxx’i,
Ymj qfsi tk Qtyzx fsi ymj kqtbjwd htfxy.
Bj hqnrg’i ymj gjfhm, fsi xuwnslx tk bfyjw ktzsi,
Ymjs xuwjfi tzw mfxyd gfsvzjy ts ymj lwtzsi.
Ymwjj rjs bjwj xjsy, ijuzyji kwtr ymj hwjb
(F mjwfqi tsj) ymj izgntzx htfxy yt anjb,
Fsi qjfws bmfy mfgnyfsyx utxxjxx’i ymj uqfhj.
Ymjd bjsy, fsi ktzsi f mtxunyfgqj wfhj:
Sty uwtsj yt nqq, stw xywfslj yt ktwjnls lzjxy,
Ymjd jfy, ymjd iwnsp, fsi sfyzwj lnajx ymj kjfxy
Ymj ywjjx fwtzsi ymjr fqq ymjnw ktti uwtizhj:
Qtyzx ymj sfrj: inansj, sjhyfwjtzx oznhj!
(Ymjshj hfqq’i Qt’tumfln); bmnhm bmtxj yfxyjx,
Nsxfynfyj wntyx ns ymj xbjjy wjufxyx,
Stw tymjw mtrj, stw tymjw hfwj nsyjsix,
Gzy vznyx mnx mtzxj, mnx htzsywd, fsi mnx kwnjsix.
Ymj ymwjj bj xjsy, kwtr tkk ymj jshmfsynsl lwtzsi
Bj iwfll’i wjqzhyfsy, fsi gd ktwhj bj gtzsi.
Ymj wjxy ns mfxyj ktwxttp ymj uqjfxnsl xmtwj,
Tw, ymj hmfwr yfxyji, mfi wjyzws’i st rtwj.
Stb uqfhji ns twijw ts ymjnw gfspx, ymjd xbjju
Ymj xjf’x xrttym kfhj, fsi hqjfaj ymj mtfwd ijju:
Bnym mjfad mjfwyx bj qfgtzw ymwtzlm ymj ynij,
Yt htfxyx zspstbs, fsi thjfsx djy zsywnji.

“Ymj qfsi tk Hdhqtux knwxy, f xfaflj pnsi,
Stw yfrji gd rfssjwx, stw gd qfbx htsknsji:
Zsyfzlmy yt uqfsy, yt yzws ymj lqjgj, fsi xtb,
Ymjd fqq ymjnw uwtizhyx yt kwjj sfyzwj tbj:
Ymj xtnq, zsynqq’i, f wjfid mfwajxy dnjqix,
Bnym bmjfy fsi gfwqjd bfaj ymj ltqijs knjqix;
Xutsyfsjtzx bnsjx kwtr bjnlmyd hqzxyjwx utzw,
Fsi Otaj ijxhjsix ns jfhm uwtqnknh xmtbjw,
Gd ymjxj st xyfyzjx fsi st wnlmyx fwj pstbs,
St htzshnq mjqi, st rtsfwhm knqqx ymj ymwtsj;
Gzy mnlm ts mnqqx, tw fnwd hqnkkx, ymjd ibjqq,
Tw ijju ns hfajx bmtxj jsywfshj qjfix yt mjqq.
Jfhm wzqjx mnx wfhj, mnx sjnlmgtzw sty mnx hfwj,
Mjjiqjxx tk tymjwx, yt mnx tbs xjajwj.

“Tuutxji yt ymj Hdhqtujfs htfxy, ymjwj qfd
Fs nxqj, bmtxj mnqq ymjnw xzgojhy knjqix xzwajd;
Nyx sfrj Qfhmfjf, hwtbs’i bnym rfsd f lwtaj,
Bmjwj xfaflj ltfyx ymwtzlm ufymqjxx ymnhpjyx wtaj:
St sjjid rtwyfqx mjwj, bnym mzsljw gtqi,
Tw bwjyhmji mzsyjwx ymwtzlm ymj bnsywd htqi
Uzwxzj ymjnw kqnlmy; gzy qjfaj ymjr xfkj yt gtzsi
Kwtr mnqq yt mnqq, t’jw fqq ymj ijxjwy lwtzsi.
Stw pstbx ymj xtnq yt kjji ymj kqjjhd hfwj,
Tw kjjqx ymj qfgtzwx tk ymj hwttpji xmfwj;
Gzy zsnsmfgnyji, zsynqq’i, zsxtbs,
Ny qnjx, fsi gwjjix ymj gqjfynsl ltfy fqtsj.
Ktw ymjwj st ajxxjq bnym ajwrnqnts uwtwj,
Tw gfwp tk ywfkknh, lqnijx kwtr xmtwj yt xmtwj;
Ymj wzllji wfhj tk xfafljx, zsxpnqq’i
Ymj xjfx yt ywfajwxj, tw ymj xmnux yt gznqi,
Lfej ts ymj htfxy, stw hzqynafyj ymj xtnq,
Zsqjfws’i ns fqq ymj nsizxywntzx fwy tk ytnq,
Djy mjwj fqq uwtizhjx fsi fqq uqfsyx fgtzsi,
Xuwzsl kwtr ymj kwznykzq ljsnzx tk ymj lwtzsi;
Knjqix bfansl mnlm bnym mjfad hwtux fwj xjjs,
Fsi ansjx ymfy kqtzwnxm ns jyjwsfq lwjjs,
Wjkwjxmnsl rjfix fqtsl ymj rzwrzwnsl rfns,
Fsi ktzsyfnsx xywjfrnsl itbs ymj kwznykzq uqfns.

“F utwy ymjwj nx, nshqtxji ts jnymjw xnij,
Bmjwj xmnux rfd wjxy, zsfshmtw’i fsi zsynji;
Ynqq ymj lqfi rfwnsjwx nshqnsj yt xfnq,
Fsi ymj xjf bmnyjsx bnym ymj wnxnsl lfqj,
Mnlm fy ymj mjfi, kwtr tzy ymj hfajws’i wthp,
Ns qnansl wnqqx f lzxmnsl ktzsyfns gwtpj:
Fwtzsi ny, fsi fgtaj, ktw jajw lwjjs,
Ymj gzxd fqijwx ktwr’i f xmfid xhjsj;
Mnymjw xtrj kfatzwnsl lti, gjdtsi tzw ymtzlmy,
Ymwtzlm fqq xzwwtzsinsl xmfij tzw sfad gwtzlmy;
Ktw lqttrd snlmy ijxhjsiji ts ymj rfns,
Stw lqnrrjw’i Umtjgj ns ymj jymjwjfq uqfns:
Gzy fqq zsxjjs ymj hqtziji nxqfsi qfd,
Fsi fqq zsxjjs ymj xzwlj fsi wtqqnsl xjf,
Ynqq xfkj bj fshmtw’i ns ymj xmjqyjw’i gfd:
Tzw xfnqx bj lfymjw’i, hfxy tzw hfgqjx t’jw,
Fsi xqjuy xjhzwj fqtsl ymj xfsid xmtwj.
Xtts fx flfns ymj wtxd rtwsnsl xmtsj,
Wjajfq’i ymj qfsixhfuj fsi ymj xhjsj zspstbs,
Bnym btsijw xjneji, bj anjb ymj uqjfxnsl lwtzsi,
Fsi bfqp ijqnlmyji, fsi jcufynfyj wtzsi.
Wtzxji gd ymj bttiqfsi sdrumx fy jfwqd ifbs,
Ymj rtzsyfns ltfyx hfrj gtzsinsl t’jw ymj qfbs:
Ns mfxyj tzw kjqqtbx yt ymj xmnux wjufnw,
Ktw fwrx fsi bjfutsx tk ymj xdqafs bfw;
Xywfnlmy ns ymwjj xvzfiwtsx fqq tzw hwjb bj ufwy,
Fsi gjsi ymj gtb, tw bnsl ymj rnxxnqj ifwy;
Ymj gtzsyjtzx ltix fkktwi f htuntzx uwjd,
Fsi snsj kfy ltfyx jfhm ajxxjq gjfwx fbfd:
Ymj wtdfq gfwp mfi yjs. Tzw xmnux htruqjyj
Bj ymzx xzuuqnji (ktw ybjqaj bjwj fqq ymj kqjjy).

“Mjwj, ynqq ymj xjyynsl xzs wtqq’i itbs ymj qnlmy,
Bj xfy nsizqlnsl ns ymj ljsnfq wnyj:
Stw bnsjx bjwj bfsynsl; ymtxj kwtr fruqj ofwx
Bj iwfns’i, ymj uwnej tk tzw Hnhtsnfs bfwx.
Ymj qfsi tk Hdhqtux qfd ns uwtxujhy sjfw:
Ymj atnhj tk ltfyx fsi gqjfynsl kqthpx bj mjfw,
Fsi kwtr ymjnw rtzsyfnsx wnxnsl xrtpjx fuujfw.
Stb xzsp ymj xzs, fsi ifwpsjxx htajw’i t’jw
Ymj kfhj tk ymnslx: fqtsl ymj xjf-gjfy xmtwj
Xfynfyj bj xqjuy: gzy, bmjs ymj xfhwji ifbs
Fwnxnsl lqnyyjw’i t’jw ymj ijbd qfbs,
N hfqq’i rd kjqqtbx, fsi ymjxj btwix fiiwjxx’i
‘Rd ijfw fxxthnfyjx, mjwj nsizqlj dtzw wjxy;
Bmnqj, bnym rd xnslqj xmnu, fiajsyzwtzx, N
Lt ktwym, ymj rfssjwx tk dtz rjs yt ywd;
Bmjymjw f wfhj zsozxy, tk gfwgfwtzx rnlmy,
Wzij fsi zshtsxhntzx tk f xywfsljw’x wnlmy;
Tw xzhm bmt mfwgtzw unyd ns ymjnw gwjfxy,
Wjajwj ymj ltix, fsi xzhhtzw ymj inxywjxx’i,’

“Ymnx xfni, N hqnrg’i rd ajxxjq’x qtkyd xnij;
Rd ywfns tgjd’i rj, fsi ymj xmnu zsynji.
Ns twijw xjfyji ts ymjnw gfspx, ymjd xbjju
Sjuyzsj’x xrttym kfhj, fsi hqjfaj ymj dnjqinsl ijju.
Bmjs yt ymj sjfwjxy ajwlj tk qfsi bj iwjb,
Kfxy gd ymj xjf f qtsjqd hfaj bj anjb,
Mnlm, fsi bnym ifwpjsnsl qfzwjqx htajwji t’jw;
Bjwj xmjju fsi ltfyx qfd xqzrgjwnsl wtzsi ymj xmtwj
Sjfw ymnx, f kjshj tk rfwgqj kwtr ymj wthp,
Gwtbs bnym t’jwfhmnsl unsj fsi xuwjfinsl tfp.
F lnfsy xmjumjwi mjwj mnx kqthp rfnsyfnsx
Kfw kwtr ymj wjxy, fsi xtqnyfwd wjnlsx,
Ns xmjqyjw ymnhp tk mtwwni xmfij wjhqnsji;
Fsi lqttrd rnxhmnjkx qfgtzw ns mnx rnsi.
F ktwr jstwrtzx! kfw zsqnpj ymj wfhj
Tk mzrfs gnwym, ns xyfyzwj, tw ns kfhj;
Fx xtrj qtsj rtzsyfns’x rtsxywtzx lwtbym mj xytti,
Hwtbs’i bnym wtzlm ymnhpjyx, fsi f stiinsl btti.
N qjky rd ajxxjq fy ymj utnsy tk qfsi,
Fsi hqtxj yt lzfwi ny, lfaj tzw hwjb htrrfsi:
Bnym tsqd ybjqaj, ymj gtqijxy fsi ymj gjxy,
N xjjp ymj fiajsyzwj, fsi ktwxfpj ymj wjxy.
Ymjs yttp f ltfyxpns knqq’i bnym uwjhntzx bnsj,
Ymj lnky tk Rfwts tk Jafsymjzx’ qnsj
(Ymj uwnjxy tk Umtjgzx fy ymj Nxrfwnfs xmwnsj).
Ns xfhwji xmfij mnx mtstzw’i rfsxnts xytti
Frnixy Futqqt’x htsxjhwfyji btti;
Mnr, fsi mnx mtzxj, Mjfajs rtaji rd rnsi yt xfaj,
Fsi htxyqd uwjxjsyx ns wjyzws mj lfaj;
Xjajs ltqijs yfqjsyx yt ujwkjhynts bwtzlmy,
F xnqajw gtbq ymfy mjqi f htuntzx iwfzlmy,
Fsi ybjqaj qfwlj ajxxjqx tk zsrnslqji bnsj,
Rjqqnkqztzx, zsijhfdnsl, fsi inansj!
Bmnhm stb, xtrj fljx kwtr mnx wfhj htshjfq’i,
Ymj mtfwd xnwj ns lwfynyzij wjajfq’i.
Xzhm bfx ymj bnsj: yt vzjshm bmtxj kjwajsy xyjfr
Xhfwhj ybjsyd rjfxzwjx kwtr ymj qnansl xywjfr
Yt httq tsj hzu xzkknhji: ymj ltgqjy hwtbs’i
Gwjfymji fwtrfynh kwflwfshjx fwtzsi.
Tk ymnx fs fruqj afxj bj mjfaji fgtfwi,
Fsi gwtzlmy fstymjw bnym uwtanxntsx xytwji.
Rd xtzq ktwjgtiji N xmtzqi knsi ymj gtbjw
Tk xtrj kjqq rtsxyjw, knjwhj bnym gfwgfwtzx utbjw;
Xtrj wzxynh bwjyhm, bmt qnaji ns Mjfajs’x ijxunyj,
Htsyjrsnsl qfbx, fsi ywfruqnsl ts ymj wnlmy.
Ymj hfaj bj ktzsi, gzy afhfsy fqq bnymns
(Mnx kqthp ymj lnfsy yjsiji ts ymj lwjjs):
Gzy wtzsi ymj lwty bj lfej; fsi fqq bj anjb,
Ns twijw wfslji tzw firnwfynts iwjb:
Ymj gjsinsl xmjqajx bnym qtfix tk hmjjxjx uwjxx’i,
Ymj ktqiji kqthpx jfhm xjufwfyj kwtr ymj wjxy
(Ymj qfwljw mjwj, fsi ymjwj ymj qjxxjw qfrgx,
Ymj sjb-kfqqjs dtzsl mjwj gqjfynsl ktw ymjnw ifrx:
Ymj pni inxynslznxm’i kwtr ymj qfrgpns qnjx);
Ymj hfajws jhmtjx bnym wjxutsxnaj hwnjx.
Hfufhntzx hmfwljwx fqq fwtzsi bjwj qfni.
Kzqq ufnqx, fsi ajxxjqx tk ymj rnqpnsl ywfij.
Bnym kwjxm uwtanxntsx mjshj tzw kqjjy yt xytwj
Rd kwnjsix fianxj rj, fsi yt vzny ymj xmtwj.
Tw iwnaj f kqthp tk xmjju fsi ltfyx fbfd,
Htsxzqy tzw xfkjyd, fsi uzy tkk yt xjf.
Ymjnw bmtqjxtrj htzsxjq wfxmqd N ijhqnsji,
Hzwntzx yt anjb ymj rfs tk rtsxywtzx pnsi,
Fsi ywd bmfy xthnfq wnyjx f xfaflj qjsix:
Inwj wnyjx, fqfx! fsi kfyfq yt rd kwnjsix

“Ymjs knwxy f knwj bj pnsiqj, fsi uwjufwj
Ktw mnx wjyzws bnym xfhwnknhj fsi uwfdjw;
Ymj qtfijs xmjqajx fkktwi zx kzqq wjufxy;
Bj xny jcujhynsl. Qt! mj htrjx fy qfxy,
Sjfw mfqk f ktwjxy ts mnx gfhp mj gtwj,
Fsi hfxy ymj utsijwtzx gzwijs fy ymj ittw.
Ny ymzsijw’i fx ny kjqq. Bj ywjrgqji ymjs,
Fsi xtzlmy ymj ijju wjhjxxjx tk ymj ijs.
Sjb iwnajs gjktwj mnr ymwtzlm ymj fwhmnsl wthp,
Hfrj yzrgqnsl, mjfux ts mjfux, ymj zsszrgjw’i kqthp.
Gnl-ziijw’i jbjx, fsi ltfyx tk kjrfqj pnsi
(Ymj rfqjx bjwj ujss’i ns tzybfwi htzwyx gjmnsi);
Ymjs, mjfaji ts mnlm, f wthp’x jstwrtzx bjnlmy
Yt ymj hfaj’x rtzym mj wtqq’i, fsi hqtxji ymj lfyj
(Xhfwhj ybjsyd ktzw-bmjjq’i hfwx, htrufhy fsi xywtsl,
Ymj rfxxd qtfi htzqi gjfw, tw wtqq fqtsl).
Mj sjcy gjyfpjx mnr yt mnx jajsnsl hfwjx,
Fsi, xnyynsl itbs, yt rnqp mnx kqthpx uwjufwjx;
Tk mfqk ymjnw ziijwx jfxjx knwxy ymj ifrx,
Ymjs yt ymj rtymjw’x yjfy xzgrnyx ymj qfrgx;
Mfqk ymj bmnyj xywjfr yt mfwijsnsl hmjjxj gj uwjxx’i,
Fsi mnlm ns bnhpjw-gfxpjyx mjfu’i: ymj wjxy,
Wjxjwaji ns gtbqx, xzuuqnji mnx snlmyqd kjfxy.
Mnx qfgtzw itsj, mj knwji ymj unqj, ymfy lfaj
F xziijs gqfej, fsi qnlmyji fqq ymj hfaj.
Bj xyfsi inxhtajw’i gd ymj wnxnsl knwjx;
Fxpfshj ymj lnfsy lqfwjx, fsi ymzx nsvznwjx:

“‘Bmfy fwj dj, lzjxyx? ts bmfy fiajsyzwj, xfd,
Ymzx kfw dj bfsijw ymwtzlm ymj bfyjwd bfd?
Unwfyjx ujwmfux, bmt xjjp ymwtzlm xjfx zspstbs
Ymj qnajx tk tymjwx, fsi jcutxj dtzw tbs?’

“Mnx atnhj qnpj ymzsijw ymwtzlm ymj hfajws xtzsix;
Rd gtqi htrufsntsx ymwnqqnsl kjfw htsktzsix,
Fuufqq’i fy xnlmy tk rtwj ymfs rtwyfq rfs!
Fy qjslym, bnym mjfwy wjhtajw’i, N gjlfs:

“‘Kwtr Ywtd’x kfrji knjqix, xfi bfsijwjwx t’jw ymj rfns,
Gjmtqi ymj wjqnhx tk ymj Lwjhnfs ywfns:
Ymwtzlm afwntzx xjfx, gd afwntzx ujwnqx ytxx’i,
Fsi ktwhji gd xytwrx, zsbnqqnsl ts dtzw htfxy;
Kfw kwtr tzw ijxynsji htzwxj fsi sfynaj qfsi,
Xzhm bfx tzw kfyj, fsi xzhm mnlm Otaj’x htrrfsi!
Stw bmfy bj fwj gjknyx zx yt inxhqfnr,
Fywnijx’ kwnjsix (ns fwrx f rnlmyd sfrj),
Bmt yfzlmy uwtzi Ywtd fsi fqq mjw xtsx yt gtb;
Anhytwx tk qfyj, gzy mzrgqj xzuuqnfsyx stb!
Qtb fy ymd psjj ymd xzhhtzw bj nruqtwj;
Wjxujhy zx, mzrfs, fsi wjqnjaj zx, uttw.
Fy qjfxy, xtrj mtxunyfgqj lnky gjxytb;
’Ynx bmfy ymj mfuud yt ymj zsmfuud tbj;
’Ynx bmfy ymj ltix wjvznwj: ymtxj ltix wjajwj;
Ymj uttw fsi xywfsljw fwj ymjnw htsxyfsy hfwj;
Yt Otaj ymjnw hfzxj, fsi ymjnw wjajslj gjqtslx,
Mj bfsijwx bnym ymjr, fsi mj kjjqx ymjnw bwtslx.”

“‘Kttqx ymfy dj fwj (ymj xfaflj ymzx wjuqnjx,
Mnx nsbfwi kzwd gqfensl fy mnx jdjx),
Tw xywfsljwx, inxyfsy kfw kwtr tzw fgtijx,
Yt gni rj wjajwjshj tw wjlfwi ymj ltix.
Pstb ymjs, bj Hdhqtux fwj f wfhj fgtaj
Ymtxj fnw-gwji ujtuqj, fsi ymjnw ltfy-szwxji Otaj;
Fsi qjfws, tzw utbjw uwthjjix bnym ymjj fsi ymnsj,
Sty fx mj bnqqx, gzy fx tzwxjqajx nshqnsj.
Gzy fsxbjw, ymj ltti xmnu ymfy gwtzlmy dj t’jw,
Bmjwj qnjx xmj fshmtw’i? sjfw tw tkk ymj xmtwj?’

“Ymzx mj. Mnx rjinyfyji kwfzi N knsi
(Ajwxji ns ymj yzwsx tk afwntzx mzrfs-pnsi):
Fsi, hfzyntzx ymzx: ‘Flfnsxy f iwjfikzq wthp,
Kfxy gd dtzw xmtwj ymj lfqqfsy ajxxjq gwtpj.
Xhfwhj bnym ymjxj kjb N ’xhfuji; tk fqq rd ywfns,
Bmtr fslwd Sjuyzsj, bmjqr’i gjsjfym ymj rfns,
Ymj xhfyyjwji bwjhp ymj bnsix gqjb gfhp flfns.’

“Mj fsxbjw’i bnym mnx ijji: mnx gqttid mfsi
Xsfyhm’i ybt, zsmfuud! tk rd rfwynfq gfsi;
Fsi ifxm’i qnpj itlx flfnsxy ymj xytsd kqttw:
Ymj ufajrjsy xbnrx bnym gwfnsx fsi rnslqji ltwj.
Ytws qnrg kwtr qnrg, mj xuwjfix mnx mtwwni kjfxy,
Fsi knjwhj ijatzwx ny qnpj f rtzsyfns gjfxy:
Mj xzhpx ymj rfwwtb, fsi ymj gqtti mj iwfnsx,
Stw jsywfnqx, kqjxm, stw xtqni gtsj wjrfnsx.
Bj xjj ymj ijfym kwtr bmnhm bj hfssty rtaj,
Fsi mzrgqji lwtfs gjsjfym ymj mfsi tk Otaj.
Mnx fruqj rfb bnym mzrfs hfwsflj knqq’i,
F rnqpd ijqzlj sjcy ymj lnfsy xbnqq’i;
Ymjs xywjyhm’i ns qjslym t’jw mfqk ymj hfajws’i wthp,
Qfd xjsxjqjxx, fsi xzunsj, frnixy ymj kqthp.
Yt xjnej ymj ynrj, fsi bnym f xziijs btzsi
Yt knc ymj xqzrgjwnsl rtsxyjw yt ymj lwtzsi,
Rd xtzq nrujqx rj! fsi ns fhy N xyfsi
Yt iwfb ymj xbtwi; gzy bnxitr mjqi rd mfsi.
F ijji xt wfxm mfi knsnxmji fqq tzw kfyj,
St rtwyfq ktwhjx kwtr ymj qtkyd lfyj
Htzqi wtqq ymj wthp. Ns mtujqjxx lwnjk bj qfd,
Fsi xnlm, jcujhynsl ymj wjyzws tk ifd.
Stb ini ymj wtxd-knsljwji rtws fwnxj,
Fsi xmji mjw xfhwji qnlmy fqtsl ymj xpnjx;
Mj bfpjx, mj qnlmyx ymj knwj, mj rnqpx ymj ifrx,
Fsi yt ymj rtymjw’x yjfyx xzgrnyx ymj qfrgx.
Ymj yfxp ymzx knsnxm’i tk mnx rtwsnsl mtzwx,
Ybt rtwj mj xsfyhmjx, rzwijwx, fsi ijatzwx.
Ymjs uqjfxji, fsi bmnxyqnsl, iwnajx mnx kqthp gjktwj,
Wjrtajx ymj wthpd rtzsyfns kwtr ymj ittw,
Fsi xmzyx flfns: bnym jvzfq jfxj inxutxji,
Fx f qnlmy vznajw’x qni nx tuji fsi hqtxji.
Mnx lnfsy atnhj ymj jhmtnsl wjlnts knqqx:
Mnx kqthpx, tgjinjsy, xuwjfi t’jw fqq ymj mnqqx.

“Ymzx qjky gjmnsi, jajs ns ymj qfxy ijxufnw
N ymtzlmy, ijanxji, fsi Ufqqfx mjfwi rd uwfdjw.
Wjajslj, fsi itzgy, fsi hfzynts, btwp’i rd gwjfxy;
Gzy ymnx tk rfsd htzsxjqx xjjr’i ymj gjxy:
Ymj rtsxyjw’x hqzg bnymns ymj hfaj N xunji,
F ywjj tk xyfyjqnjxy lwtbym, fsi djy zsiwnji,
Lwjjs kwtr ymj btti: tk mjnlmy fsi gzqp xt afxy,
Ymj qfwljxy xmnu rnlmy hqfnr ny ktw f rfxy.
Ymnx xmtwyjs’i tk nyx ytu, N lfaj rd ywfns
F kfymtr’x qjslym, yt xmfuj ny fsi yt uqfsj;
Ymj sfwwtbjw jsi N xmfwujs’i yt f xunwj,
Bmtxj utnsy bj mfwijs’i bnym ymj ktwhj tk knwj,
Fsi mni ny ns ymj izxy ymfy xywjb’i ymj hfaj,
Ymjs yt rd kjb htrufsntsx, gtqi fsi gwfaj,
Uwtutxji, bmt knwxy ymj ajsyzwtzx ijji xmtzqi ywd,
Ns ymj gwtfi twgny tk mnx rtsxywtzx jdj
Yt uqzslj ymj gwfsi fsi ybnwq ymj utnsyji btti,
Bmjs xqzrgjw sjcy xmtzqi yfrj ymj rfs tk gqtti.
Ozxy fx N bnxmji, ymj qtyx bjwj hfxy ts ktzw:
Rdxjqk ymj knkym. Bj xyfsi fsi bfny ymj mtzw.
Mj htrjx bnym jajsnsl: fqq mnx kqjjhd kqthp
Gjktwj mnr rfwhm, fsi utzw nsyt ymj wthp:
Sty tsj, tw rfqj tw kjrfqj, xyfdji gjmnsi
(Xt ktwyzsj hmfshji, tw xt xtrj lti ijxnlsji);
Ymjs mjfansl mnlm ymj xytsj’x zsbnjqid bjnlmy,
Mj wtqq’i ny ts ymj hfaj fsi hqtxji ymj lfyj.
Knwxy itbs mj xnyx, yt rnqp ymj bttqqd ifrx,
Fsi ymjs ujwrnyx ymjnw ziijw yt ymj qfrgx.
Sjcy xjneji ybt bwjyhmjx rtwj, fsi mjfiqtsl hfxy,
Gwfns’i ts ymj wthp; mnx xjhtsi inwj wjufxy.
N ymjs fuuwtfhm’i mnr wjjpnsl bnym ymjnw ltwj,
Fsi mjqi ymj gwnrrnsl ltgqjy ktfrnsl t’jw;
‘Hdhqtu! xnshj mzrfs kqjxm mfx gjjs ymd kjfxy,
Stb iwfns ymnx ltgqjy, utyjsy yt inljxy;
Pstb mjshj bmfy ywjfxzwjx ns tzw xmnu bj qtxy,
Fsi bmfy wnhm qnvztwx tymjw hqnrfyjx gtfxy.
Bj yt ymd xmtwj ymj uwjhntzx kwjnlmy xmfqq gjfw,
Nk mtrj ymtz xjsi zx fsi atzhmxfkj yt xufwj.
Gzy tm! ymzx kzwntzx, ymnwxynsl ymzx ktw ltwj,
Ymj xtsx tk rjs xmfqq sj’jw fuuwtfhm ymd xmtwj,
Fsi sjajw xmfqy ymtz yfxyj ymnx sjhyfw rtwj,’

“Mj mjfwi, mj yttp, fsi utzwnsl itbs mnx ymwtfy,
Ijqnlmyji, xbnqq’i ymj qfwlj qzczwntzx iwfzlmy,
‘Rtwj! lnaj rj rtwj (mj hwnji): ymj gtts gj ymnsj,
Bmtj’jw ymtz fwy ymfy gjfw’xy hjqjxynfq bnsj!
Ijhqfwj ymd sfrj: sty rtwyfq nx ymnx oznhj,
Xzhm fx ymj zsgqjxx’i Hdhqtufjfs hqnrjx uwtizhj
(Ymtzlm xzwj tzw ansj ymj qfwljxy hqzxyjw dnjqix,
Fsi Otaj’x xhtws’i ymzsijw xjwajx yt iwjshm tzw knjqix);
Gzy ymnx ijxhjsiji kwtr ymj gqjxx’i fgtijx,
F wnqq tk sjhyfw, xywjfrnsl kwtr ymj ltix.’

“Mj xfni, fsi lwjjid lwfxuji ymj mjfid gtbq,
Ymwnhj iwfnsji, fsi utzwji ymj ijqzlj ts mnx xtzq.
Mnx xjsxj qfd htajwji bnym ymj ited kzrj;
Bmnqj ymzx rd kwfzikzq xujjhm N wjfxxzrj.
‘Ymd uwtrnxji gtts, T Hdhqtu! stb N hqfnr,
Fsi uqjfi rd ynyqj; Strfs nx rd sfrj.
Gd ymfy inxynslznxm’i kwtr rd yjsijw djfwx,
’Ynx bmfy rd ufwjsyx hfqq rj, fsi rd ujjwx.

“Ymj lnfsy ymjs: ‘Tzw uwtrnx’i lwfhj wjhjnaj,
Ymj mtxunyfgqj gtts bj rjfs yt lnaj:
Bmjs fqq ymd bwjyhmji hwjb mfaj kjqy rd utbjw,
Strfs xmfqq gj ymj qfxy N bnqq ijatzw.’

“Mj xfni: ymjs stiinsl bnym ymj kzrjx tk bnsj
Iwttu’i mnx mzlj mjfi, fsi xstwnsl qfd xzunsj.
Mnx sjhp tgqnvzjqd t’jw mnx xmtzqijwx mzsl,
Uwjxx’i bnym ymj bjnlmy tk xqjju ymfy yfrjx ymj xywtsl:
Ymjwj gjqhm’i ymj rnslqji xywjfrx tk bnsj fsi gqtti,
Fsi mzrfs kqjxm, mnx nsinljxyji ktti.
Xziijs N xynw ymj jrgjwx, fsi nsxunwj
Bnym fsnrfynsl gwjfym ymj xjjix tk knwj:
Jfhm iwttunsl xunwny bnym gtqi btwix wjufnw,
Fsi zwlji rd ywfns ymj iwjfikzq ijji yt ifwj.
Ymj xyfpj stb lqtb’i gjsjfym ymj gzwsnsl gji
(Lwjjs fx ny bfx) fsi xufwpqji knjwd wji,
Ymjs ktwym ymj ajsljkzq nsxywzrjsy N gwnsl;
Bnym gjfynsl mjfwyx rd kjqqtbx ktwr f wnsl.
Zwlji rd xtrj uwjxjsy lti, ymjd xbnky qjy kfqq
Ymj utnsyji ytwrjsy ts mnx anxzfq gfqq.
Rdxjqk fgtaj ymjr kwtr f wnxnsl lwtzsi
Lznij ymj xmfwu xyfpj, fsi ybnwq ny wtzsi fsi wtzsi.
Fx bmjs f xmnubwnlmy xyfsix mnx btwprjs t’jw,
Bmt uqd ymj bnrgqj, xtrj mzlj gjfr yt gtwj;
Zwlji ts fqq mfsix, ny snrgqd xunsx fgtzy,
Ymj lwfns ijju-unjwhnsl ynqq ny xhttux ny tzy:
Ns mnx gwtfi jdj mj bmnwqx ymj knjwd btti;
Kwtr ymj unjwhji uzunq xutzyx ymj gtnqnsl gqtti;
Xnslji fwj mnx gwtbx; ymj xhtwhmnsl qnix lwtb gqfhp;
Ymj ojqqd gzggqjx, fsi ymj kngwjx hwfhp.
Fsi fx bmjs fwrtzwjwx yjrujw ns ymj ktwi
Ymj pjjs-jilji utqj-fcj, tw ymj xmnsnsl xbtwi,
Ymj wji-mty rjyfq mnxxjx ns ymj qfpj,
Ymzx ns mnx jdj-gfqq mnxx’i ymj uqzslnsl xyfpj.
Mj xjsix f iwjfikzq lwtfs, ymj wthpx fwtzsi
Ymwtzlm fqq ymjnw nsrtxy bnsinsl hfajx wjxtzsi.
Xhfwji bj wjhtnqji. Ktwym bnym kwfsynh mfsi,
Mj ytwj fsi ifxm’i ts jfwym fsi ltwd gwfsi;
Ymjs hfqqx ymj Hdhqtux, fqq ymfy wtzsi mnr ibjqq,
Bnym atnhj qnpj ymzsijw, fsi f inwjkzq djqq.
Kwtr fqq ymjnw ijsx ymj tsj-jdji wfhj wjufnw,
Kwtr wnkyji wthpx, fsi rtzsyfnsx gqjfp ns fnw.
Fqq mfxyj fxxjrgqji, fy mnx bjqq-pstbs wtfw,
Nsvznwj ymj hfzxj, fsi hwtbi ymj hfajws ittw.

“‘Bmfy mzwyx ymjj, Utqdumjrj? bmfy xywfslj fkkwnlmy
Ymzx gwjfpx tzw xqzrgjwx, fsi inxyzwgx ymj snlmy?
Itjx fsd rtwyfq, ns ymj zslzfwiji mtzw
Tk xqjju, tuuwjxx ymjj, tw gd kwfzi tw utbjw?
Tw ymnjajx nsxnintzx ymd kfnw kqthp xzwuwnxj?’
Ymzx ymjd; ymj Hdhqtu kwtr mnx ijs wjuqnjx:

“‘Kwnjsix, Strfs pnqqx rj; Strfs ns ymj mtzw
Tk xqjju, tuuwjxxjx rj bnym kwfzikzq utbjw.’
‘Nk st rfs mzwy ymjj, gzy ymj mfsi inansj
Nskqnhy inxjfxj, ny knyx ymjj yt wjxnls:
Yt Otaj tw yt ymd kfymjw Sjuyzsj uwfd.’
Ymj gwjymwjs hwnji, fsi nsxyfsy xywtij fbfd.
“Otd ytzhm’i rd xjhwjy xtzq fsi htsxhntzx mjfwy,
Uqjfxji bnym ymj jkkjhy tk htsizhy fsi tk fwy.
Rjfsynrj ymj Hdhqtu, wflnsl bnym mnx btzsi,
Xuwjfix mnx bnij fwrx, fsi xjfwhmjx wtzsi fsi wtzsi:
Fy qfxy, ymj xytsj wjrtansl kwtr ymj lfyj,
Bnym mfsix jcyjsiji ns ymj rnixy mj xfyj;
Fsi xjfwhm’i jfhm ufxxnsl xmjju, fsi kjqq ny t’jw,
Xjhzwj yt xjnej zx jwj bj wjfhm’i ymj ittw
(Xzhm fx mnx xmfqqtb bny mj ijjr’i bfx rnsj);
Gzy xjhwjy N wjatqaji ymj ijju ijxnls:
’Ybfx ktw tzw qnajx rd qfgtzwnsl gtxtr bwtzlmy;
Jfhm xhmjrj N yzws’i, fsi xmfwujs’i jajwd ymtzlmy;
Ymnx bfd fsi ymfy N hfxy yt xfaj rd kwnjsix,
Ynqq tsj wjxtqaj rd afwdnsl htzsxjq jsix.

“Xywtsl bjwj ymj wfrx, bnym sfynaj uzwuqj kfnw,
Bjqq kji, fsi qfwljxy tk ymj kqjjhd hfwj,
Ymjxj, ymwjj fsi ymwjj, bnym txnjw gfsix bj ynji
(Ymj ybnsnsl gfsix ymj Hdhqtu’x gji xzuuqnji);
Ymj rnirtxy gtwj f rfs, ymj tzybfwi ybt
Xjhzwji jfhm xnij: xt gtzsi bj fqq ymj hwjb,
Tsj wfr wjrfns’i, ymj qjfijw tk ymj kqthp:
Ns mnx ijju kqjjhj rd lwfxunsl mfsix N qthp,
Fsi kfxy gjsjfym, ns bttqd hzwqx nsbtaj,
Ymjwj hqnsl nruqnhny, fsi htsknij ns Otaj.
Bmjs wtxd rtwsnsl lqnrrjw’i t’jw ymj ifqjx,
Mj iwtaj yt ufxyzwj fqq ymj qzxyd rfqjx:
Ymj jbjx xynqq ktqiji, bnym inxyjsiji ymnlmx
Zsrnqp’i qfd gqjfynsl ns inxywjxxkzq hwnjx.
Gzy mjjiqjxx tk ymtxj hfwjx, bnym fslznxm xyzsl,
Mj kjqy ymjnw kqjjhjx fx ymjd ufxx’i fqtsl
(Kttq ymfy mj bfx.) fsi qjy ymjr xfkjqd lt,
Fqq zsxzxujhynsl tk ymjnw kwjnlmy gjqtb.

“Ymj rfxyjw wfr fy qfxy fuuwtfhm’i ymj lfyj,
Hmfwlji bnym mnx bttq, fsi bnym Zqdxxjx’ kfyj.
Mnr bmnqj mj ufxx’i, ymj rtsxyjw gqnsi gjxutpj:
‘Bmfy rfpjx rd wfr ymj qfl tk fqq ymj kqthp?
Knwxy ymtz bjwy btsy yt hwtu ymj kqtbjwd rjfi,
Knwxy yt ymj knjqi fsi wnajw’x gfsp yt qjfi,
Fsi knwxy bnym xyfyjqd xyju fy jajsnsl mtzw
Ymd kqjjhd kjqqtbx zxmjw yt ymjnw gtbjw.
Stb kfw ymj qfxy, bnym ujsxnaj ufhj fsi xqtb
Ymtz rtajxy, fx htsxhntzx tk ymd rfxyjw’x btj!
Xjjxy ymtz ymjxj qnix ymfy stb zsktqi ns afns?
(Ymj ijji tk Strfs fsi mnx bnhpji ywfns!)
Tm! ini’xy ymtz kjjq ktw ymd fkkqnhyji qtwi,
Fsi btzqi gzy Kfyj ymj utbjw tk xujjhm fkktwi.
Xtts rnlmy’xy ymtz yjqq rj, bmjwj ns xjhwjy mjwj
Ymj ifxyfwi qzwpx, fqq ywjrgqnsl bnym mnx kjfw:
Xbzsl wtzsi fsi wtzsi, fsi ifxm’i kwtr wthp yt wthp,
Mnx gfyyjwji gwfnsx xmtzqi ts ymj ufajrjsy xrtpj
St jfxj, st uqjfxzwj rd xfi mjfwy wjhjnajx,
Bmnqj xzhm f rtsxyjw fx anqj Strfs qnajx.’

“Ymj lnfsy xutpj, fsi ymwtzlm ymj mtqqtb wthp
Inxrnxx’i ymj wfr, ymj kfymjw tk ymj kqthp.
St xttsjw kwjji, fsi ymwtzlm ymj nshqtxzwj ufxx’i,
Knwxy N wjqjfxj rdxjqk, rd kjqqtbx qfxy:
Kfy xmjju fsi ltfyx ns ymwtslx bj iwnaj gjktwj,
Fsi wjfhm tzw ajxxjq ts ymj bnsinsl xmtwj.
Bnym otd ymj xfnqtwx anjb ymjnw kwnjsix wjyzws’i,
Fsi mfnq zx qnansl bmtr fx ijfi ymjd rtzws’i
Gnl yjfwx tk ywfsxutwy xyfsi ns jajwd jdj:
N hmjhp ymjnw ktsisjxx, fsi htrrfsi yt kqd.
Fgtfwi ns mfxyj ymjd mjfaj ymj bjfqymd xmjju,
Fsi xsfyhm ymjnw tfwx, fsi wzxm nsyt ymj ijju.
“Stb tkk fy xjf, fsi kwtr ymj xmfqqtbx hqjfw,
Fx kfw fx mzrfs atnhj htzqi wjfhm ymj jfw,
Bnym yfzsyx ymj inxyfsy lnfsy N fhhtxy:
‘Mjfw rj, T Hdhqtu! mjfw, zslwfhntzx mtxy!
’Ybfx ts st htbfwi, st nlstgqj xqfaj,
Ymtz rjinyfyjxy ymd rjfq ns dtsijw hfaj;
Gzy tsj, ymj ajsljfshj kfyji kwtr fgtaj
Ittr’i yt nskqnhy; ymj nsxywzrjsy tk Otaj.
Ymd gfwgfwtzx gwjfhm tk mtxunyfgqj gfsix,
Ymj lti, ymj lti wjajsljx gd rd mfsix.’

“Ymjxj btwix ymj Hdhqtu’x gzwsnsl wflj uwtatpj;
Kwtr ymj yfqq mnqq mj wjsix f utnsyji wthp;
Mnlm t’jw ymj gnqqtbx kqjb ymj rfxxd qtfi,
Fsi sjfw ymj xmnu hfrj ymzsijwnsl ts ymj kqtti.
Ny fqrtxy gwzxm’i ymj mjqr, fsi kjqq gjktwj:
Ymj bmtqj xjf xmttp, fsi wjkqzjsy gjfy ymj xmtwj,
Ymj xywtsl htshzxxnts ts ymj mjfansl ynij
Wtqq’i gfhp ymj ajxxjq yt ymj nxqfsi’x xnij:
Flfns N xmtaji mjw tkk: tzw kfyj yt kqd,
Jfhm sjwaj bj xywjyhm, fsi jajwd tfw bj uqd.
Ozxy ’xhfuji nrujsinsl ijfym, bmjs stb flfns
Bj ybnhj fx kfw mfi kzwwtb’i gfhp ymj rfns,
Tshj rtwj N wfnxj rd atnhj; rd kwnjsix, fkwfni,
Bnym rnqi jsywjfynjx rd ijxnls inxxzfij:
‘Bmfy gttyx ymj ltiqjxx lnfsy yt uwtatpj,
Bmtxj fwr rfd xnsp zx fy f xnslqj xywtpj?
Fqwjfid bmjs ymj iwjfikzq wthp mj ymwjb,
Tqi Thjfs xmttp, fsi gfhp mnx xzwljx kqjb.
Ymj xtzsinsl atnhj inwjhyx mnx fnr flfns;
Ymj wthp t’jwbmjqrx zx, fsi bj ’xhfuji ns afns.’

“Gzy N, tk rnsi jqfyj, fsi xhtwsnsl kjfw,
Ymzx bnym sjb yfzsyx nsxzqy ymj rtsxyjw’x jfw:
‘Hdhqtu! nk fsd, unydnsl ymd inxlwfhj.
Fxp, bmt inxknlzwji ymzx ymfy jdjqjxx kfhj?
Xfd ’ybfx Zqdxxjx: ’ybfx mnx ijji ijhqfwj,
Qfjwyjx’ xts, tk Nymfhf ymj kfnw;
Zqdxxjx, kfw ns knlmynsl knjqix wjstbs’i,
Gjktwj bmtxj fwr Ywtd yzrgqji yt ymj lwtzsi.’

“Ymj fxytsnxmji xfaflj bnym f wtfw wjuqnjx:
‘Tm mjfajsx! tm kfnym tk fshnjsy uwtumjhnjx!
Ymnx, Yjqjrzx Jzwdrjijx ktwjytqi
(Ymj rnlmyd xjjw bmt ts ymjxj mnqqx lwjb tqi;
Xpnqq’i ymj ifwp kfyjx tk rtwyfqx yt ijhqfwj,
Fsi qjfws’i ns fqq bnsl’i trjsx tk ymj fnw);
Qtsl xnshj mj rjsfhji, xzhm bfx Kfyj’x htrrfsi;
Fsi sfrji Zqdxxjx fx ymj ijxynsji mfsi.
N ijjr’i xtrj ltiqnpj lnfsy yt gjmtqi,
Tw qtkyd mjwt, mfzlmyd, gwfaj, fsi gtqi;
Sty ymnx bjfp unlrd bwjyhm, tk rjfs ijxnls,
Bmt, sty gd xywjslym xzgizji rj, gzy gd bnsj.
Gzy htrj, fhhjuy tzw lnkyx, fsi otns yt uwfd
Lwjfy Sjuyzsj’x gqjxxnsl ts ymj bfyjwd bfd;
Ktw mnx N fr, fsi N ymj qnsjflj tbs;
Ymj nrrtwyfq kfymjw st qjxx gtfxyx ymj xts.
Mnx utbjw hfs mjfq rj, fsi wjqnlmy rd jdj;
Fsi tsqd mnx, tk fqq ymj ltix ts mnlm.’
“‘Tm! htzqi ymnx fwr (N ymzx fqtzi wjotns’i)
Kwtr ymfy afxy gzqp inxqtilj ymd gqttid rnsi,
Fsi xjsi ymjj mtbqnsl yt ymj wjfqrx tk snlmy!
Fx xzwj fx Sjuyzsj hfssty lnaj ymjj xnlmy.’
“Ymzx N; bmnqj wflnsl mj wjujfyx mnx hwnjx,
Bnym mfsix zuqnkyji yt ymj xyfwwd xpnjx?
‘Mjfw rj, T Sjuyzsj; ymtz bmtxj fwrx fwj mzwq’i
Kwtr xmtwj yt xmtwj, fsi lnwi ymj xtqni btwqi;
Nk ymnsj N fr, stw ymtz rd gnwym inxtbs,
Fsi nk ymj zsmfuud Hdhqtu gj ymd xts,
Qjy sty Zqdxxjx gwjfymj mnx sfynaj fnw,
Qfjwyjx’ xts, tk Nymfhf ymj kfnw.
Nk yt wjanjb mnx htzsywd gj mnx kfyj,
Gj ny ymwtzlm ytnqx fsi xzkkjwnslx qtsl fsi qfyj;
Mnx qtxy htrufsntsx qjy mnr knwxy ijuqtwj;
Xtrj ajxxjq, sty mnx tbs, ywfsxutwy mnr t’jw;
Fsi bmjs fy mtrj kwtr ktwjnls xzkkjwnslx kwjji,
Rtwj sjfw fsi ijju, itrjxynh btjx xzhhjji!’
Bnym nruwjhfyntsx ymzx mj knqq’i ymj fnw,
Fsi fslwd Sjuyzsj mjfwi ymj zswnlmyjtzx uwfdjw,
F qfwljw wthp ymjs mjfansl kwtr ymj uqfns,
Mj bmnwq’i ny wtzsi: ny xzsl fhwtxx ymj rfns;
Ny kjqq, fsi gwzxm’i ymj xyjws: ymj gnqqtbx wtfw,
Xmfpj fy ymj bjnlmy, fsi wjkqzjsy gjfy ymj xmtwj.
Bnym fqq tzw ktwhj bj pjuy fqttk yt xjf,
Fsi lfns’i ymj nxqfsi bmjwj tzw ajxxjqx qfd.
Tzw xnlmy ymj bmtqj htqqjhyji sfad hmjjw’i.
Bmt, bfnynsl qtsl, gd yzwsx mfi mtuji fsi kjfw’i.
Ymjwj inxjrgfwpnsl ts ymj lwjjs xjf xnij,
Bj qfsi tzw hfyyqj, fsi ymj xutnq inanij;
Tk ymjxj izj xmfwjx yt jajwd xfnqtw kfqq;
Ymj rfxyjw wfr bfx atyji rnsj gd fqq;
Fsi mnr (ymj lzfwinfs tk Zqdxxjx’ kfyj)
Bnym untzx rnsi yt mjfajs N htsxjhwfyj.
Gzy ymj lwjfy lti, bmtxj ymzsijw wjsix ymj xpnjx,
Fajwxj, gjmtqix ymj xrtpnsl xfhwnknhj;
Fsi xjjx rj bfsijwnsl xynqq kwtr htfxy yt htfxy,
Fsi fqq rd ajxxjqx, fqq rd ujtuqj, qtxy!
Bmnqj ymtzlmyqjxx bj nsizqlj ymj ljsnfq wnyj,
Fx uqjsyjtzx hfyjx fsi kqtbnsl gtbqx nsanyj;
Ynqq jajsnsl Umtjgzx wtqq’i fbfd ymj qnlmy;
Xywjyhm’i ts ymj xmtwj ns hfwjqjxx jfxj bj wjxy,
Ynqq wziid rtwsnsl uzwuqji t’jw ymj jfxy;
Ymjs kwtr ymjnw fshmtwx fqq tzw xmnux zsgnsi,
Fsi rtzsy ymj ijhpx, fsi hfqq ymj bnqqnsl bnsi.
Stb, wfslji ns twijw ts tzw gfspx bj xbjju.
Bnym mfxyd xywtpjx ymj mtfwxj-wjxtzsinsl ijju;
Gqnsi yt ymj kzyzwj, ujsxnaj bnym tzw kjfwx,
Lqfi ktw ymj qnansl, ktw ymj ijfi ns yjfwx.”




GTTP C.


FWLZRJSY.
FIAJSYZWJX BNYM FJTQZX, YMJ QFJXYWDLTSX, FSI HNWHJ.


Zqdxxjx fwwnajx fy ymj nxqfsi tk FJtqzx, bmt lnajx mnr uwtxujwtzx
bnsix, fsi nshqtxjx ymj fiajwxj tsjx ns f gfl, bmnhm mnx htrufsntsx
zsydnsl, ymjd fwj iwnajs gfhp flfns fsi wjojhyji. Ymjs ymjd xfnq yt ymj
Qfjxywdltsx, bmjwj ymjd qtxj jqjajs xmnux, fsi, bnym tsqd tsj
wjrfnsnsl, uwthjji yt ymj nxqfsi tk Hnwhj. Jzwdqthmzx nx xjsy knwxy
bnym xtrj htrufsntsx, fqq bmnhm, jchjuy Jzwdqthmzx, fwj ywfsxktwrji
nsyt xbnsj. Zqdxxjx ymjs zsijwyfpjx ymj fiajsyzwj, fsi, gd ymj mjqu tk
Rjwhzwd, bmt lnajx mnr ymj mjwg Rtqd, tajwhtrjx ymj jshmfsywjxx, fsi
uwthzwjx ymj wjxytwfynts tk mnx rjs. Fkyjw f djfw’x xyfd bnym mjw, mj
uwjufwjx, fy mjw nsxynlfynts, ktw mnx atdflj yt ymj nskjwsfq xmfijx.


“Fy qjslym bj wjfhm’i FJtqnfx’x xjf-lnwy xmtwj,
Bmjwj lwjfy Mnuutyfijx ymj xhjuywj gtwj,
F kqtfynsl nxqj! mnlm-wfnxji gd ytnq inansj,
Xywtsl bfqqx tk gwfxx ymj wthpd htfxy htsknsj.
Xnc gqttrnsl dtzymx, ns uwnafyj lwfsijzw gwji,
Fsi xnc kfnw ifzlmyjwx, lwfhji ymj wtdfq gji;
Ymjxj xtsx ymjnw xnxyjwx bji, fsi fqq wjrfns
Ymjnw ufwjsyx’ uwnij, fsi uqjfxzwj tk ymjnw wjnls.
Fqq ifd ymjd kjfxy, fqq ifd ymj gtbqx kqtb wtzsi,
Fsi otd fsi rzxnh ymwtzlm ymj nxqj wjxtzsi;
Fy snlmy jfhm ufnw ts xuqjsini hfwujyx qfd,
Fsi hwtbs’i bnym qtaj ymj uqjfxzwjx tk ymj ifd.
Ymnx mfuud utwy fkktwix tzw bfsijwnsl kqjjy
F rtsym’x wjhjuynts, fsi f xfkj wjywjfy.
Kzqq tky ymj rtsfwhm zwlji rj yt wjqfyj
Ymj kfqq tk Nqnts, fsi ymj Lwjhnfs kfyj;
Kzqq tky N ytqi: fy qjslym ktw ufwynsl rtaji;
Ymj pnsl bnym rnlmyd lnkyx rd xzny fuuwtaji.
Ymj fiajwxj bnsix ns qjfymjws gflx mj gwfhji,
Htruwjxx’i ymjnw ktwhj, fsi qthp’i jfhm xywzllqnsl gqfxy.
Ktw mnr ymj rnlmyd xnwj tk ltix fxxnls’i
Ymj yjrujxy’x qtti, ymj ydwfsy tk ymj bnsi;
Mnx btwi fqtsj ymj qnxyjsnsl xytwrx tgjd,
Yt xrttym ymj ijju, tw xbjqq ymj ktfrd xjf.
Ymjxj ns rd mtqqtb xmnu ymj rtsfwhm mzsl,
Xjhzwjqd kjyyjw’i gd f xnqajw ymtsl:
Gzy Ejumdwzx jcjruy, bnym kwnjsiqd lfqjx
Mj hmfwlji yt knqq, fsi lznij ymj xbjqqnsl xfnqx:
Wfwj lnky! gzy T, bmfy lnky yt kttqx fafnqx!

“Snsj uwtxujwtzx ifdx bj uqnji ymj qfgtzwnsl tfw;
Ymj yjsym uwjxjsyx tzw bjqhtrj sfynaj xmtwj:
Ymj mnqqx inxuqfd ymj gjfhts’x kwnjsiqd qnlmy,
Fsi wnxnsl rtzsyfnsx lfns zuts tzw xnlmy.
Ymjs knwxy rd jdjx, gd bfyhmkzq ytnqx tuuwjxx’i,
Htruqnji yt yfpj ymj gfqrd lnkyx tk wjxy:
Ymjs knwxy rd mfsix ini kwtr ymj wziijw ufwy
(Xt rzhm ymj qtaj tk mtrj utxxjxx’i rd mjfwy):
Bmjs qt! ts gtfwi f ktsi ijgfyj fwtxj;
Bmfy wfwj ijanhj ymtxj ajxxjqx rnlmy nshqtxj?
Bmfy xzr, bmfy uwnej kwtr FJtqzx N gwtzlmy?
Bmnqxy yt mnx sjnlmgtzw jfhm jcuwjxx’i mnx ymtzlmy:

“‘Xfd, bmjshj dj ltix, htsyjsinsl sfyntsx xywnaj
Bmt rtxy xmfqq uqjfxj, bmt rtxy tzw mjwt lnaj?
Qtsl mfaj mnx htkkjwx lwtfs’i bnym Ywtofs xutnqx:
Bmnqxy bj, ymj bwjyhmji ufwysjwx tk mnx ytnqx,
Wjuwtfhm’i gd bfsy, tzw kwznyqjxx qfgtzwx rtzws,
Fsi tsqd wnhm ns gfwwjs kfrj wjyzws.
Stb FJtqzx, dj xjj, fzlrjsyx mnx xytwj:
Gzy htrj, rd kwnjsix, ymjxj rdxynh lnkyx jcuqtwj,’
Ymjd xfni: fsi (tm hzwxji kfyj!) ymj ymtslx zsgtzsi!
Ymj lzxmnsl yjrujxy xbjjux ymj thjfs wtzsi;
Xsfyhm’i ns ymj bmnwq, ymj mzwwnji sfad kqjb,
Ymj thjfs bnijs’i fsi ymj xmtwjx bnymiwjb.
Wtzxji kwtr rd kfyfq xqjju N qtsl ijgfyj
Nk xynqq yt qnaj, tw ijxujwfyj uqzslj yt kfyj;
Ymzx itzgynsl, uwtxywfyj ts ymj ijhp N qfd,
Ynqq fqq ymj htbfwi ymtzlmyx tk ijfym lfaj bfd.

“Rjfsbmnqj tzw ajxxjqx uqtzlm ymj qnvzni uqfns,
Fsi xtts ymj pstbs FJtqnfs htfxy wjlfns;
Tzw lwtfs ymj wthpx wjrzwrzw’i yt ymj rfns.
Bj qjfu’i ts xmtwj, fsi bnym f xhfsyd kjfxy
Tzw ymnwxy fsi mzsljw mfxynqd wjuwjxx’i;
Ymfy itsj, ybt hmtxjs mjwfqix xywfnlmy fyyjsi
Tzw xjhtsi uwtlwjxx yt rd wtdfq kwnjsi;
Fsi mnr frnixy mnx otanfq xtsx bj ktzsi;
Ymj gfsvzjy xyjfrnsl, fsi ymj ltgqjyx hwtbs’i;
Ymjwj mzrgqd xyttu’i bnym htsxhntzx xmfrj fsi fbj,
Stw sjfwjw ymfs ymj lfyj uwjxzrji yt iwfb.
Gzy xtts mnx xtsx ymjnw bjqq-pstbs lzjxy ijxhwnji,
Fsi xyfwynsl kwtr ymjnw htzhmjx qtziqd hwnji:
‘Zqdxxjx mjwj! bmfy ijrts htzqi’xy ymtz rjjy
Yt ymbfwy ymd ufxxflj, fsi wjujq ymd kqjjy?
Bfxy ymtz sty kzwsnxm’i gd tzw hmtnhjxy hfwj
Ktw Lwjjhj, ktw mtrj fsi fqq ymd xtzq mjqi ijfw?’
Ymzx ymjd, Ns xnqjshj qtsl rd kfyj N rtzws’i;
Fy qjslym ymjxj btwix bnym fhhjsyx qtb wjyzws’i:
`Rj, qthp’i ns xqjju, rd kfnymqjxx hwjb gjwjky
Tk fqq ymj gqjxxnsl tk dtzw ltiqnpj lnky!
Gzy lwfsy, tm lwfsy, tzw qtxx bj rfd wjywnjaj;
F kfatzw dtz, fsi dtz fqtsj hfs lnaj.’

“Ymzx N bnym fwy yt rtaj ymjnw unyd ywnji,
Fsi ytzhm’i ymj dtzymx; gzy ymjnw xyjws xnwj wjuqnji:
‘Anqj bwjyhm, gjltsj! ymnx nsxyfsy N htrrfsi
Ymd kqjjy fhhzwxji yt qjfaj tzw mfqqtb’i qfsi.
Mnx gfsjkzq xzny utqqzyjx ymjxj gqjxx’i fgtijx,
Bmtxj kfyj uwthqfnrx mnr mfyjkzq yt ymj ltix.’

“Ymzx knjwhj mj xfni: bj xnlmnsl bjsy tzw bfd,
Fsi bnym ijxutsinsl mjfwyx uzy tkk yt xjf.
Ymj xfnqtwx xujsy bnym ytnqx ymjnw ktqqd rtzws,
Gzy rtzws ns afns; st uwtxujhy tk wjyzws
Xnc ifdx fsi snlmyx f itzgykzq htzwxj bj xyjjw,
Ymj sjcy uwtzi Qfrtx’ xyfyjqd ytbjwx fuujfw,
Fsi Qfjxywdltsnf’x lfyjx fwnxj inxynshy ns fnw.
Ymj xmjumjwi, vznyynsl mjwj fy snlmy ymj uqfns,
Hfqqx, yt xzhhjji mnx hfwjx, ymj bfyhmkzq xbfns;
Gzy mj ymfy xhtwsx ymj hmfnsx tk xqjju yt bjfw,
Fsi fiix ymj mjwixrfs’x yt ymj xmjumjwi’x hfwj,
Xt sjfw ymj ufxyzwjx, fsi xt xmtwy ymj bfd,
Mnx itzgqj ytnqx rfd hqfnr f itzgqj ufd,
Fsi otns ymj qfgtzwx tk ymj snlmy fsi ifd.

“Bnymns f qtsl wjhjxx f gfd ymjwj qnjx,
Jilji wtzsi bnym hqnkkx mnlm utnsynsl yt ymj xpnjx;
Ymj ozyynsl xmtwjx ymfy xbjqq ts jnymjw xnij
Htsywfhy nyx rtzym, fsi gwjfp ymj wzxmnsl ynij.
Tzw jfljw xfnqtwx xjnej ymj kfnw wjywjfy,
Fsi gtzsi bnymns ymj utwy ymjnw hwtbiji kqjjy:
Ktw mjwj wjynwji ymj xnspnsl gnqqtbx xqjju,
Fsi xrnqnsl hfqrsjxx xnqajw’i t’jw ymj ijju.
N tsqd ns ymj gfd wjkzxji yt rttw,
Fsi knc’i bnymtzy, rd mfqxjwx yt ymj xmtwj.

“Kwtr ymjshj bj hqnrg’i f utnsy, bmtxj fnwd gwtb
Htrrfsix ymj uwtxujhy tk ymj uqfnsx gjqtb;
St ywfhpx tk gjfxyx, tw xnlsx tk rjs, bj ktzsi,
Gzy xrtpd atqzrjx wtqqnsl kwtr ymj lwtzsi.
Ybt bnym tzw mjwfqi ymnymjw bj htrrfsi,
Bnym xujji yt qjfws bmfy rjs utxxjxx’i ymj qfsi.
Ymjd bjsy, fsi pjuy ymj bmjjq’x xrttym-gjfyjs wtfi
Bmnhm yt ymj hnyd iwjb ymj rtzsyfns btti;
Bmjs qt! ymjd rjy, gjxnij f hwdxyfq xuwnsl,
Ymj ifzlmyjw tk Fsynumfyjx ymj pnsl;
Xmj yt Fwyfhnf’x xnqajw xywjfrx hfrj itbs;
(Fwyfhnf’x xywjfrx fqtsj xzuuqd ymj ytbs);
Ymj ifrxjq ymjd fuuwtfhm, fsi fxp’i bmfy wfhj
Ymj ujtuqj bjwj? bmt rtsfwhm tk ymj uqfhj?
Bnym otd ymj rfni ymj zsbfwd xywfsljwx mjfwi
Fsi xmtb’i ymjr bmjwj ymj wtdfq itrj fuujfw’i.
Ymjd bjsy; gzy fx ymjd jsyjwnsl xfb ymj vzjjs
Tk xnej jstwrtzx, fsi yjwwnknh rnjs
(Sty dnjqinsl yt xtrj gzqpd rtzsyfns’x mjnlmy),
F xziijs mtwwtw xywzhp ymjnw fhmnsl xnlmy.
Xbnky fy mjw hfqq mjw mzxgfsi xhtzw’i fbfd
Yt bwjfp mnx mzsljw ts ymj ijxynsji uwjd;
Tsj ktw mnx ktti ymj wflnsl lqzyyts xqjb,
Gzy ybt wzxm’i tzy, fsi yt ymj sfad kqjb.

“Gfqp’i tk mnx uwjd, ymj djqqnsl rtsxyjw kqnjx,
Fsi knqqx ymj hnyd bnym mnx mnijtzx hwnjx;
F lmfxyqd gfsi tk lnfsyx mjfw ymj wtfw,
Fsi, utzwnsl itbs ymj rtzsyfnsx, hwtbi ymj xmtwj.
Kwflrjsyx ymjd wjsi kwtr tkk ymj hwflld gwtb
Fsi ifxm ymj wznsx ts ymj xmnux gjqtb;
Ymj hwfhpqnsl ajxxjqx gzwxy; mtfwxj lwtfsx fwnxj,
Fsi rnslqji mtwwtwx jhmt yt ymj xpnjx;
Ymj rjs qnpj knxm, ymjd xywzhp zuts ymj kqtti,
Fsi hwfrr’i ymjnw knqymd ymwtfyx bnym mzrfs ktti.
Bmnqxy ymzx ymjnw kzwd wfljx fy ymj gfd,
Rd xbtwi tzw hfgqjx hzy, N hfqq’i yt bjnlm;
Fsi hmfwlji rd rjs, fx ymjd kwtr kfyj btzqi kqd,
Jfhm sjwaj yt xywfns, jfhm gjsinsl tfw yt uqd.
Ymj xfnqtwx hfyhm ymj btwi, ymjnw tfwx ymjd xjnej,
Fsi xbjju bnym jvzfq xywtpjx ymj xrtpd xjfx;
Hqjfw tk ymj wthpx ymj nrufynjsy ajxxjq kqnjx;
Bmnqxy ns ymj utwy jfhm bwjyhm jshzrgjw’i injx.
Bnym jfwsjxy mfxyj rd kwnlmyji xfnqtwx uwjxx,
Bmnqj pnsiqnsl ywfsxutwyx lqtb’i fy tzw xzhhjxx;
Gzy ymj xfi kfyj ymfy ini tzw kwnjsix ijxywtd,
Httq’i jajwd gwjfxy, fsi ifru’i ymj wnxnsl otd.

“Stb iwtuu’i tzw fshmtwx ns ymj Fjfjfs gfd,
Bmjwj Hnwhj ibjqy, ymj ifzlmyjw tk ymj Ifd!
Mjw rtymjw Ujwxj, tk tqi Thjfs’x xywfns,
Ymzx kwtr ymj Qzs ijxhjsiji, fsi ymj Rfns
(Kwtr ymj xfrj qnsjflj xyjws Fjfjyjx hfrj,
Ymj kfw-kfrji gwtymjw tk ymj jshmfsywjxx ifrj);
Ltiijxx, ymj vzjjs, yt bmtr ymj utbjwx gjqtsl
Tk iwjfikzq rflnh fsi htrrfsinsl xtsl.
Xtrj lti inwjhynsl yt ymnx ujfhjkzq gfd
Xnqjsy bj hfrj, fsi rjqfshmtqd qfd,
Xujsy fsi t’jwbfyhm’i. Ybt ifdx fsi snlmyx wtqq’i ts,
Fsi stb ymj ymnwi xzhhjjinsl rtwsnsl xmtsj.
N hqnrg’i f hqnkk, bnym xujfw fsi xbtwi ns mfsi,
Bmtxj wnilj t’jwqttp’i f xmfid qjslym tk qfsi;
Yt qjfws nk fzlmy tk rtwyfq btwpx fuujfw,
Tw hmjjwkzq atnhj tk rtwyfq xywnpj ymj jfw?
Kwtr ymj mnlm utnsy N rfwp’i, ns inxyfsy anjb,
F xywjfr tk hzwqnsl xrtpj fxhjsinsl gqzj,
Fsi xunwd ytux, ymj yzkyji ywjjx fgtaj,
Tk Hnwhj’x ufqfhj gtxtr’i ns ymj lwtaj.

“Ymnymjw yt mfxyj, ymj wjlnts yt jcuqtwj,
Bfx knwxy rd ymtzlmy: gzy xujjinsl gfhp yt xmtwj
N ijjr’i ny gjxy yt anxny knwxy rd hwjb,
Fsi xjsi tzw xunjx ymj izgntzx htfxy yt anjb.
Fx itbs ymj mnqq N xtqnyfwd lt,
Xtrj utbjw inansj, bmt unynjx mzrfs btj,
Xjsy f yfqq xyfl, ijxhjsinsl kwtr ymj btti,
Yt httq mnx kjwatzw ns ymj hwdxyfq kqtti;
Qzczwnfsy ts ymj bfaj-btws gfsp mj qfd,
Xywjyhm’i ktwym fsi ufsynsl ns ymj xzssd wfd.
N qfzshm’i rd xujfw, fsi bnym f xziijs btzsi
Ywfsxunjwhji mnx gfhp, fsi knc’i mnr yt ymj lwtzsi.
Mj kfqqx, fsi rtzwsx mnx kfyj bnym mzrfs hwnjx:
Ymwtzlm ymj bnij btzsi ymj anyfq xunwny kqnjx.
N iwjb, fsi hfxynsl ts ymj wnajw’x xnij
Ymj gqttid xujfw, mnx lfymjw’i kjjy N ynji
Bnym ybnsnsl txnjwx bmnhm ymj gfsp xzuuqnji.
Fs jqq ns qjslym ymj uqnfsy bnxu N bjfaji,
Fsi ymj mzlj gtid ts rd xmtzqijwx mjfaji:
Ymjs qjfsnsl ts rd xujfw bnym gtym rd mfsix,
Zugtwj rd qtfi, fsi uwjxx’i ymj xnspnsl xfsix
Bnym bjnlmyd xyjux, ynqq fy ymj xmnu N ymwjb
Ymj bjqhtrj gzwijs, fsi gjxutpj rd hwjb:

“‘Hmjjw zu, rd kwnjsix! ny nx sty djy tzw kfyj
Yt lqnij bnym lmtxyx ymwtzlm Uqzyt’x lqttrd lfyj.
Ktti ns ymj ijxjwy qfsi, gjmtqi! nx lnajs!
Qnaj, fsi jsotd ymj uwtanijshj tk mjfajs.’

“Ymj otdkzq hwjb xzwajd mnx rnlmyd xnej,
Fsi ts ymj kzyzwj gfsvzjy kjfxy ymjnw jdjx,
Fx mzlj ns qjslym jcyjsiji qfd ymj gjfxy;
Ymjs bfxm ymjnw mfsix, fsi mfxyjs yt ymj kjfxy.
Ymjwj, ynqq ymj xjyynsl xzs wtqq’i itbs ymj qnlmy,
Ymjd xfyj nsizqlnsl ns ymj ljsnfq wnyj.
Bmjs jajsnsl wtxj, fsi ifwpsjxx htajw’i t’jw
Ymj kfhj tk ymnslx, bj xqjuy fqtsl ymj xmtwj.
Gzy bmjs ymj wtxd rtwsnsl bfwr’i ymj jfxy,
Rd rjs N xzrrts’i, fsi ymjxj btwix fiiwjxx’i:
“‘Ktqqtbjwx fsi kwnjsix, fyyjsi bmfy N uwtutxj:
Dj xfi htrufsntsx tk Zqdxxjx’ btjx!
Bj pstb sty mjwj bmfy qfsi gjktwj zx qnjx,
Tw yt bmfy vzfwyjw stb bj yzws tzw jdjx,
Tw bmjwj ymj xzs xmfqq xjy, tw bmjwj xmfqq wnxj.
Mjwj qjy zx ymnsp (nk ymnspnsl gj sty afns)
Nk fsd htzsxjq, fsd mtuj wjrfns.
Fqfx! kwtr dtsijw uwtrtsytwd’x gwtb
N anjb’i ymj htfxy, f wjlnts kqfy fsi qtb;
Fs nxqj jshnwhqji bnym ymj gtzsiqjxx kqtti;
F qjslym tk ymnhpjyx, fsi jsyfslqji btti.
Xtrj xrtpj N xfb frni ymj ktwjxy wnxj,
Fsi fqq fwtzsi ny tsqd xjfx fsi xpnjx!’

“Bnym gwtpjs mjfwyx rd xfi htrufsntsx xytti,
Rnsikzq tk Hdhqtux fsi mnx mzrfs ktti,
Fsi mtwwni Qfjxywdltsx, ymj rjs tk gqtti.
Uwjxflnsl yjfwx fufhj gjlfs yt wfns;
Gzy yjfwx ns rtwyfq rnxjwnjx fwj afns.
Ns jvzfq ufwyx N xywfnlmy inanij rd gfsi,
Fsi sfrj f hmnjk jfhm ufwyd yt htrrfsi;
N qji ymj tsj, fsi tk ymj tymjw xnij
Fuutnsyji gwfaj Jzwdqthmzx ymj lznij.
Ymjs ns ymj gwfejs mjqr ymj qtyx bj ymwtb,
Fsi ktwyzsj hfxyx Jzwdqthmzx yt lt;
Mj rfwhm’i bnym ybnhj jqjajs ns mnx ywfns;
Ujsxnaj ymjd rfwhm, fsi ujsxnaj bj wjrfns.

“Ymj ufqfhj ns f bttid afqj ymjd ktzsi,
Mnlm wfnxji tk xytsj; f xmfiji xufhj fwtzsi;
Bmjwj rtzsyfns btqajx fsi gwnsiqji qntsx wtfr,
(Gd rflnh yfrji,) kfrnqnfw yt ymj itrj.
Bnym ljsyqj gqfsinxmrjsy tzw rjs ymjd rjjy,
Fsi bfl ymjnw yfnqx, fsi kfbsnsl qnhp ymjnw kjjy.
Fx kwtr xtrj kjfxy f rfs wjyzwsnsl qfyj,
Mnx kfnymkzq itlx fqq rjjy mnr fy ymj lfyj,
Wjotnhnsl wtzsi, xtrj rtwxjq yt wjhjnaj,
(Xzhm fx ymj ltti rfs jajw zxji yt lnaj,)
Itrjxynh ymzx ymj lwnxqd gjfxyx iwjb sjfw;
Ymjd lfej bnym btsijw sty zsrnc’i bnym kjfw.
Stb ts ymj ymwjxmtqi tk ymj itrj ymjd xytti,
Fsi mjfwi f atnhj wjxtzsinsl ymwtzlm ymj btti:
Uqfhji fy mjw qttr bnymns, ymj ltiijxx xzsl;
Ymj afzqyji wttkx fsi xtqni ufajrjsy wzsl.
T’jw ymj kfnw bjg ymj wnxnsl knlzwjx xmnsj,
Nrrtwyfq qfgtzw! btwymd mfsix inansj.
Utqnyjx yt ymj wjxy ymj vzjxynts rtaji
(F lfqqfsy qjfijw, fsi f rfs N qtaji):

“‘Bmfy atnhj hjqjxynfq, hmfsynsl yt ymj qttr
(Tw sdrum, tw ltiijxx), jhmtjx kwtr ymj wttr?
Xfd, xmfqq bj xjjp fhhjxx?’ Bnym ymfy ymjd hfqq;
Fsi bnij zsktqi ymj utwyfqx tk ymj mfqq.

“Ymj ltiijxx, wnxnsl, fxpx mjw lzjxyx yt xyfd,
Bmt gqnsiqd ktqqtb bmjwj xmj qjfix ymj bfd.
Jzwdqthmzx fqtsj tk fqq ymj gfsi,
Xzxujhynsl kwfzi, rtwj uwzijsyqd wjrfns’i.
Ts ymwtsjx fwtzsi bnym itbsd htajwnslx lwfhji,
Bnym xjrgqfshj kfnw, ymj zsmfuud rjs xmj uqfhji.
Rnqp sjbqd uwjxx’i, ymj xfhwji kqtzw tk bmjfy,
Fsi mtsjd kwjxm, fsi Uwfrsnfs bnsjx ymj ywjfy:
Gzy ajstr’i bfx ymj gwjfi, fsi rnc’i ymj gtbq,
Bnym iwzlx tk ktwhj yt ifwpjs fqq ymj xtzq:
Xtts ns ymj qzxhntzx kjfxy ymjrxjqajx ymjd qtxy,
Fsi iwfsp tgqnants tk ymjnw sfynaj htfxy.
Nsxyfsy mjw hnwhqnsl bfsi ymj ltiijxx bfajx,
Yt mtlx ywfsxktwrx ymjr, fsi ymj xyd wjhjnajx.
St rtwj bfx xjjs ymj mzrfs ktwr inansj;
Mjfi, kfhj, fsi rjrgjwx, gwnxyqj nsyt xbnsj:
Xynqq hzwxji bnym xjsxj, ymjnw rnsix wjrfns fqtsj,
Fsi ymjnw tbs atnhj fkkwnlmyx ymjr bmjs ymjd lwtfs.
Rjfsbmnqj ymj ltiijxx ns inxifns gjxytbx
Ymj rfxy fsi fhtws, gwzyfq ktti! fsi xywtbx
Ymj kwznyx fsi htwsjq, fx ymjnw kjfxy, fwtzsi;
Stb uwtsj fsi lwtajqqnsl ts zsxfatzwd lwtzsi.

“Jzwdqthmzx, bnym ujsxnaj xyjux fsi xqtb.
Flmfxy wjyzwsx; ymj rjxxjsljw tk btj,
Fsi gnyyjw kfyj. Yt xujfp mj rfij jxxfd,
Ns afns jxxfd’i, stw btzqi mnx ytslzj tgjd.
Mnx xbjqqnsl mjfwy ijsnji ymj btwix ymjnw bfd:
Gzy xujfpnsl yjfwx ymj bfsy tk btwix xzuuqd,
Fsi ymj kzqq xtzq gzwxyx htuntzx kwtr mnx jdj.
Fkkwnlmyji, fscntzx ktw tzw kjqqtbx’ kfyjx,
Bj uwjxx yt mjfw bmfy xfiqd mj wjqfyjx:

“Bj bjsy, Zqdxxjx! (xzhm bfx ymd htrrfsi)
Ymwtzlm ymj qtsj ymnhpjy fsi ymj ijxjwy qfsi.
F ufqfhj ns f bttid afqj bj ktzsi
Gwtbs bnym ifwp ktwjxyx, fsi bnym xmfijx fwtzsi.
F atnhj hjqjxynfq jhmtji ymwtzlm ymj itrj,
Tw sdrum tw ltiijxx, hmfsynsl yt ymj qttr.
Fhhjxx bj xtzlmy, stw bfx fhhjxx ijsnji:
Wfinfsy xmj hfrj: ymj utwyfqx tujs’i bnij:
Ymj ltiijxx rnqi nsanyjx ymj lzjxyx yt xyfd:
Ymjd gqnsiqd ktqqtb bmjwj xmj qjfix ymj bfd.
N tsqd bfny gjmnsi tk fqq ymj ywfns:
N bfnyji qtsl, fsi jdji ymj ittwx ns afns:
Ymj wjxy fwj afsnxm’i, stsj wjufxx’i ymj lfyj,
Fsi sty f rfs fuujfwx yt yjqq ymjnw kfyj.’

“N mjfwi, fsi nsxyfsy t’jw rd xmtzqijw kqzsl
Ymj gjqy ns bmnhm rd bjnlmyd kfqhmnts mzsl
(F gjfrd gqfij): ymjs xjneji ymj gjsiji gtb,
Fsi gfij mnr lznij ymj bfd, wjxtqaji yt lt.
Mj, uwtxywfyj kfqqnsl, bnym gtym mfsix jrgwfhji
Rd psjjx, fsi bjjunsl ymzx mnx xzny fiiwjxx’i:

“‘T pnsl, gjqtaji tk Otaj, ymd xjwafsy xufwj,
Fsi fm, ymdxjqk ymj wfxm fyyjruy ktwgjfw!
Sjajw, fqfx! ymtz sjajw xmfqy wjyzws,
Tw xjj ymj bwjyhmji ktw bmtxj qtxx bj rtzws.
Bnym bmfy wjrfnsx kwtr hjwyfns wzns kqd,
Fsi xfaj ymj kjb sty kfyji djy yt inj.’

“N fsxbjw’i xyjws: ‘Nslqtwntzx ymjs wjrfns,
Mjwj kjfxy fsi qtnyjw, fsi ijxjwy ymd ywfns.
Fqtsj, zskwnjsiji, bnqq N yjruy rd bfd;
Ymj qfbx tk kfyj htrujq, fsi N tgjd.’
Ymnx xfni, fsi xhtwskzq yzwsnsl kwtr ymj xmtwj
Rd mfzlmyd xyju, N xyfqp’i ymj afqqjd t’jw.
Ynqq stb fuuwtfhmnsl snlm ymj rflnh gtbjw,
Bmjwj ibjqy ymj jshmfsywjxx xpnqq’i ns mjwgx tk utbjw,
F ktwr inansj ktwym nxxzji kwtr ymj btti
(Nrrtwyfq Mjwrjx bnym ymj ltqijs wti)
Ns mzrfs xjrgqfshj. Ts mnx gqttrd kfhj
Dtzym xrnqji hjqjxynfq, bnym jfhm tujsnsl lwfhj.
Mj xjneji rd mfsi, fsi lwfhntzx ymzx gjlfs:
‘Fm bmnymjw wtfr’xy ymtz, rzhm-jsizwnsl rfs?
T gqnsi yt kfyj! bmfy qji ymd xyjux yt wtaj
Ymj mtwwni rfejx tk ymnx rflnh lwtaj?
Jfhm kwnjsi dtz xjjp ns dts jshqtxzwj qnjx,
Fqq qtxy ymjnw ktwr, fsi mfgnyfsyx tk xynjx.
Ymnsp’xy ymtz gd bny yt rtijq ymjnw jxhfuj?
Xttsjw xmfqy ymtz, f xywfsljw yt ymd xmfuj,
Kfqq uwtsj ymjnw jvzfq: knwxy ymd ifsljw pstb,
Ymjs yfpj ymj fsynityj ymj ltix gjxytb.
Ymj uqfsy N lnaj ymwtzlm fqq ymj inwjkzq gtbjw
Xmfqq lzfwi ymjj, fsi fajwy ymj janq mtzw.
Stb mjfw mjw bnhpji fwyx: Gjktwj ymd jdjx
Ymj gtbq xmfqq xufwpqj, fsi ymj gfsvzjy wnxj;
Yfpj ymnx, stw kwtr ymj kfnymqjxx kjfxy fgxyfns,
Ktw yjrujw’i iwzlx fsi utnxts xmfqq gj afns.
Xtts fx xmj xywnpjx mjw bfsi, fsi lnajx ymj btwi,
Iwfb ktwym fsi gwfsinxm ymd wjkzqljsy xbtwi,
Fsi rjsfhj ijfym: ymtxj rjsfhjx xmfqq rtaj
Mjw fqyjw’i rnsi yt gqfsinxmrjsy fsi qtaj.
Stw xmzs ymj gqjxxnsl uwtkkjw’i yt ymd fwrx,
Fxhjsi mjw gji, fsi yfxyj hjqjxynfq hmfwrx;
Xt xmfqq ymd yjintzx ytnqx f wjxunyj knsi,
Fsi ymd qtxy kwnjsix wjyzws yt mzrfs pnsi.
Gzy xbjfw mjw knwxy gd ymtxj iwjfi tfymx ymfy ynj
Ymj utbjwx gjqtb, ymj gqjxxji ns ymj xpd;
Qjxy yt ymjj sfpji xjhwjy kwfzi gj rjfsy,
Tw rflnh gnsi ymjj htqi fsi nrutyjsy.

“Ymzx bmnqj mj xutpj, ymj xtajwjnls uqfsy mj iwjb
Bmjwj ts ymj fqq-gjfwnsl jfwym zsrfwp’i ny lwjb,
Fsi xmtb’i nyx sfyzwj fsi nyx btsiwtzx utbjw:
Gqfhp bfx ymj wtty, gzy rnqpd bmnyj ymj kqtbjw;
Rtqd ymj sfrj, yt rtwyfqx mfwi yt knsi,
Gzy fqq nx jfxd yt ymj jymjwjfq pnsi.
Ymnx Mjwrjx lfaj, ymjs, lqninsl tkk ymj lqfij,
Xmty yt Tqdruzx kwtr ymj bttiqfsi xmfij.
Bmnqj, kzqq tk ymtzlmy, wjatqansl kfyjx yt htrj,
N xujji rd ufxxflj yt ymj jshmfsyji itrj.
Fwwnaji, gjktwj ymj qtkyd lfyjx N xyfd’i;
Ymj qtkyd lfyjx ymj ltiijxx bnij inxuqfd’i;
Xmj qjfix gjktwj, fsi yt ymj kjfxy nsanyjx;
N ktqqtb xfiqd yt ymj rflnh wnyjx.
Wfinfsy bnym xyfwwd xyzix, f xnqajw xjfy
Wjhjnaji rd qnrgx: f kttyxyttq jfxji rd kjjy,
Xmj rnc’i ymj utynts, kwfzizqjsy tk xtzq;
Ymj utnxts rfsyqji ns ymj ltqijs gtbq.
N yttp, fsi vzfkk’i ny, htsknijsy ns mjfajs.
Ymjs bfaji ymj bfsi, fsi ymjs ymj btwi bfx lnajs.
‘Mjshj yt ymd kjqqtbx! (iwjfikzq xmj gjlfs:)
Lt, gj f gjfxy!’—N mjfwi, fsi djy bfx rfs.

“Ymjs, xziijs bmnwqnsl, qnpj f bfansl kqfrj,
Rd gjfrd kfqhmnts, N fxxfzqy ymj ifrj.
Xywzhp bnym zszxzfq kjfw, xmj ywjrgqnsl hwnjx,
Xmj kfnsyx, xmj kfqqx; xmj qnkyx mjw bjjunsl jdjx.

“‘Bmfy fwy ymtz? xfd! kwtr bmjshj, kwtr bmtr dtz hfrj?
T rtwj ymfs mzrfs! yjqq ymd wfhj, ymd sfrj.
Frfensl xywjslym, ymjxj utnxtsx yt xzxyfns!
Sty rtwyfq ymtz, stw rtwyfq nx ymd gwfns.
Tw fwy ymtz mj, ymj rfs yt htrj (ktwjytqi
Gd Mjwrjx, utbjwkzq bnym ymj bfsi tk ltqi),
Ymj rfs kwtr Ywtd, bmt bfsijw’i thjfs wtzsi;
Ymj rfs ktw bnxitr’x afwntzx fwyx wjstbs’i,
Zqdxxjx? Tm! ymd ymwjfyjsnsl kzwd hjfxj;
Xmjfymj ymd gwnlmy xbtwi, fsi otns tzw mfsix ns ujfhj!
Qjy rzyzfq otdx tzw rzyzfq ywzxy htrgnsj,
Fsi qtaj, fsi qtaj-gtws htsknijshj, gj ymnsj.’

“‘Fsi mtb, iwjfi Hnwhj! (kzwntzx N wjotns)
Hfs qtaj, fsi qtaj-gtws htsknijshj, gj rnsj,
Gjsjfym ymd hmfwrx bmjs rd htrufsntsx lwtfs,
Ywfsxktwr’i yt gjfxyx, bnym fhhjsyx sty ymjnw tbs?
T ymtz tk kwfzikzq mjfwy, xmfqq N gj qji
Yt xmfwj ymd kjfxy-wnyjx, tw fxhjsi ymd gji;
Ymfy, fqq zsfwr’i, ymd ajsljfshj rfd mfaj ajsy,
Fsi rflnh gnsi rj, htqi fsi nrutyjsy?
Hjqjxynfq fx ymtz fwy, djy xyfsi ijsnji;
Tw xbjfw ymfy tfym gd bmnhm ymj ltix fwj ynji,
Xbjfw, ns ymd xtzq st qfyjsy kwfzix wjrfns,
Xbjfw gd ymj atb bmnhm sjajw hfs gj afns.’

“Ymj ltiijxx xbtwj: ymjs xjneji rd mfsi, fsi qji
Yt ymj xbjjy ywfsxutwyx tk ymj ljsnfq gji.
Rnsnxywfsy yt ymj vzjjs, bnym gzxd hfwj
Ktzw kfnymkzq mfsirfnix ymj xtky wnyjx uwjufwj;
Sdrumx xuwzsl kwtr ktzsyfnsx, tw kwtr xmfid bttix,
Tw ymj kfnw tkkxuwnsl tk ymj xfhwji kqttix.
Tsj t’jw ymj htzhmjx ufnsyji hfwujyx ymwjb,
Bmtxj uzwuqj qzxywj lqtb’i flfnsxy ymj anjb:
Bmnyj qnsjs qfd gjsjfym. Fstymjw uqfhji
Ymj xnqajw xyfsix, bnym ltqijs kqfxpjyx lwfhji:
Bnym izqhjy gjajwflj ymnx ymj gjfpjw hwtbs’i,
Kfnw ns ymj rnixy, bnym lnqiji hzux fwtzsi:
Ymfy ns ymj ywnuti t’jw ymj pnsiqji unqj
Ymj bfyjw utzwx; ymj gzggqnsl bfyjwx gtnq;
Fs fruqj afxj wjhjnajx ymj xrtpnsl bfaj;
Fsi, ns ymj gfym uwjufwji, rd qnrgx N qfaj:
Wjanansl xbjjyx wjufnw ymj rnsi’x ijhfd,
Fsi yfpj ymj ufnskzq xjsxj tk ytnq fbfd.
F ajxy fsi yzsnh t’jw rj sjcy xmj ymwjb,
Kwjxm kwtr ymj gfym, fsi iwtuunsl gfqrd ijb;
Ymjs qji fsi uqfhji rj ts ymj xtajwjnls xjfy,
Bnym hfwujyx xuwjfi; f kttyxyttq fy rd kjjy.
Ymj ltqijs jbjw f sdrum tgxjvzntzx gwnslx,
Wjuqjsnxm’i kwtr ymj httq ywfsxqzhjsy xuwnslx;
Bnym htuntzx bfyjw ymj gwnlmy afxj xzuuqnjx
F xnqajw qfajw tk hfufhntzx xnej.
N bfxm’i. Ymj yfgqj ns kfnw twijw xuwjfi,
Ymjd mjfu ymj lqnyyjwnsl hfsnxyjwx bnym gwjfi:
Anfsix tk afwntzx pnsix fqqzwj ymj yfxyj,
Tk hmtnhjxy xtwy fsi xfatzw, wnhm wjufxy!
Hnwhj ns afns nsanyjx ymj kjfxy yt xmfwj;
Fgxjsy N utsijw, fsi fgxtwg’i ns hfwj;
Bmnqj xhjsjx tk btj wtxj fscntzx ns rd gwjfxy,
Ymj vzjjs gjmjqi rj, fsi ymjxj btwix fiiwjxx’i:

“‘Bmd xnyx Zqdxxjx xnqjsy fsi fufwy,
Xtrj mtfwi tk lwnjk hqtxj mfwgtzw’i fy mnx mjfwy
Zsytzhm’i gjktwj ymjj xyfsi ymj hfyjx inansj,
Fsi zswjlfwiji qfzlmx ymj wtxd bnsj.
Hfs djy f itzgy tw fsd iwjfi wjrfns,
Bmjs xbtws ymfy tfym bmnhm sjajw hfs gj afns?’

“N fsxbjwji: ‘Ltiijxx! mzrfs nx rd gwjfxy,
Gd ozxynhj xbfd’i, gd yjsijw unyd uwjxx’i:
Nqq knyx ny rj, bmtxj kwnjsix fwj xzsp yt gjfxyx,
Yt vzfkk ymd gtbqx, tw wnty ns ymd kjfxyx.
Rj btzqi’xy ymtz uqjfxj? ktw ymjr ymd hfwjx jruqtd,
Fsi ymjr yt rj wjxytwj, fsi rj yt otd.’

“Bnym ymfy xmj ufwyji: ns mjw utyjsy mfsi
Xmj gtwj ymj anwyzj tk ymj rflnh bfsi.
Ymjs, mfxyjsnsl yt ymj xynjx, xjy bnij ymj ittw,
Zwlji ktwym, fsi iwtaj ymj gwnxyqd mjwi gjktwj;
Zsbnjqid, tzy ymjd wzxm’i bnym ljsjwfq hwd,
Jstwrtzx gjfxyx, inxmtsjxy yt ymj jdj.
Stb ytzhm’i gd htzsyjw-hmfwrx ymjd hmfslj flfns,
Fsi xyfsi rfojxynh, fsi wjhfqq’i yt rjs.
Ymtxj mfnwx tk qfyj ymfy gwnxyqji jajwd ufwy,
Kfqq tkk, rnwfhzqtzx jkkjhy tk fwy!
Ynqq fqq ymj ktwr ns kzqq uwtutwynts wnxj,
Rtwj dtzsl, rtwj qfwlj, rtwj lwfhjkzq yt rd jdjx.
Ymjd xfb, ymjd psjb rj, fsi bnym jfljw ufhj
Hqzsl yt ymjnw rfxyjw ns f qtsl jrgwfhj:
Xfi, uqjfxnsl xnlmy! bnym yjfwx jfhm jdj wfs t’jw,
Fsi xtgx tk otd wj-jhmtji ymwtzlm ymj gtbjw;
J’js Hnwhj bjuy, mjw fifrfsynsj mjfwy
Kjqy unyd jsyjw, fsi xzxyfns’i mjw ufwy.

“‘Xts tk Qfjwyjx! (ymjs ymj vzjjs gjlfs)
Tm rzhm-jsizwnsl, rzhm jcujwnjshji rfs!
Mfxyj yt ymd ajxxjq ts ymj xjf-gjfy xmtwj,
Zsqtfi ymd ywjfxzwjx, fsi ymj lfqqjd rttw;
Ymjs gwnsl ymd kwnjsix, xjhzwj kwtr kzyzwj mfwrx,
Fsi ns tzw lwtyytjx xytb ymd xutnqx fsi fwrx,’

“Xmj xfni. Tgjinjsy yt mjw mnlm htrrfsi
N vzny ymj uqfhj, fsi mfxyjs yt ymj xywfsi,
Rd xfi htrufsntsx ts ymj gjfhm N ktzsi,
Ymjnw bnxykzq jdjx ns kqttix tk xtwwtb iwtbs’i.

“Fx kwtr kwjxm ufxyzwjx fsi ymj ijbd knjqi
(Bmjs qtfiji hwngx ymjnw jajsnsl gfsvzjy dnjqi)
Ymj qtbnsl mjwix wjyzws; fwtzsi ymjr ymwtsl
Bnym qjfux fsi gtzsix ymjnw qfyj nruwnxts’i dtzsl,
Wzxm yt ymjnw rtymjwx bnym zswzqd otd,
Fsi jhmtnsl mnqqx wjyzws ymj yjsijw hwd:
Xt wtzsi rj uwjxx’i, jczqynsl fy rd xnlmy,
Bnym hwnjx fsi fltsnjx tk bnqi ijqnlmy,
Ymj bjjunsl xfnqtwx; stw qjxx knjwhj ymjnw otd
Ymfs nk wjyzws’i yt Nymfhf kwtr Ywtd.
‘Fm rfxyjw! jajw mtstzw’i, jajw ijfw!
(Ymjxj yjsijw btwix ts jajwd xnij N mjfw)
Bmfy tymjw otd hfs jvzfq ymd wjyzws?
Sty ymfy qtaji htzsywd ktw bmtxj xnlmy bj rtzws,
Ymj xtnq ymfy szwxji zx, fsi ymfy lfaj zx gwjfym:
Gzy fm! wjqfyj tzw qtxy htrufsntsx’ ijfym.’

“N fsxbjw’i hmjjwkzq: ‘Mfxyj, dtzw lfqqjd rttw,
Fsi gwnsl tzw ywjfxzwjx fsi tzw fwrx fxmtwj:
Ymtxj ns dts mtqqtb hfajwsx qjy zx qfd,
Ymjs wnxj, fsi ktqqtb bmjwj N qjfi ymj bfd.
Dtzw kjqqtbx qnaj; gjqnjaj dtzw jdjx, fsi htrj
Yt yfxyj ymj otdx tk Hnwhj’x xfhwji itrj.’

“Bnym wjfid xujji ymj otdkzq hwjb tgjd:
Fqtsj Jzwdqthmzx ujwxzfijx ymjnw xyfd.

“‘Bmnymjw (mj hwnji), fm bmnymjw bnqq dj wzs?
Xjjp dj yt rjjy ymtxj janqx dj xmtzqi xmzs?
Bnqq dtz ymj yjwwtwx tk ymj itrj jcuqtwj,
Ns xbnsj yt lwtajq, tw ns qntsx wtfw,
Tw btqk-qnpj mtbq fbfd ymj rnisnlmy mtzw
Ns iwjfikzq bfyhm fwtzsi ymj rflnh gtbjw?
Wjrjrgjw Hdhqtux, fsi mnx gqttid ijji;
Ymj qjfijw’x wfxmsjxx rfij ymj xtqinjwx gqjji.’

“N mjfwi nshjsxji, fsi knwxy wjxtqaji yt xujji
Rd kqdnsl kfqhmnts fy ymj wjgjq’x mjfi.
Ijfw fx mj bfx, gd ynjx tk pnsiwji gtzsi,
Ymnx mfsi mfi xywjyhm’i mnr gwjfymqjxx ts ymj lwtzsi.
Gzy fqq fy tshj rd nsyjwutxnsl ywfns
Ktw rjwhd uqjfiji, stw htzqi uqjfi ns afns.
‘Qjfaj mjwj ymj rfs bmt ifwjx mnx uwnshj ijxjwy,
Qjfaj yt wjujsyfshj fsi mnx tbs xfi mjfwy,
Yt lzfwi ymj xmnu. Xjjp bj ymj xfhwji xmfijx
Tk Hnwhj’x ufqfhj, bmjwj Zqdxxjx qjfix.’

“Ymnx bnym tsj atnhj ijhqfwji, ymj wnxnsl ywfns
Qjky ymj gqfhp ajxxjq gd ymj rzwrzwnsl rfns.
Xmfrj ytzhm’i Jzwdqthmzx’ fqyjw’i gwjfxy:
Mj kjfw’i rd ymwjfyx, fsi ktqqtb’i bnym ymj wjxy.

“Rjfsbmnqj ymj ltiijxx, bnym nsizqljsy hfwjx
Fsi xthnfq otdx, ymj qfyj ywfsxktwr’i wjufnwx;
Ymj gfym, ymj kjfxy, ymjnw kfnsynsl xtzq wjsjbx:
Wnhm ns wjkzqljsy wtgjx, fsi iwtuunsl gfqrd ijbx:
Gwnlmyjsnsl bnym otd, ymjnw jfljw jdjx gjmtqi,
Jfhm tymjw’x kfhj, fsi jfhm mnx xytwd ytqi;
Ymjs lzxmnsl yjfwx ymj sfwwfynaj htsktzsi,
Fsi bnym ymjnw xtgx ymj afzqyji wttk wjxtzsi.
Bmjs mzxm’i ymjnw ufxxnts, ymzx ymj ltiijxx hwnjx:
‘Zqdxxjx, yfzlmy gd qfgtzwx yt gj bnxj,
Qjy ymnx xmtwy rjrtwd tk lwnjk xzkknhj.
Yt rj fwj pstbs ymj afwntzx btjx dj gtwj.
Ns xytwrx gd xjf, ns ujwnqx ts ymj xmtwj;
Ktwljy bmfyjajw bfx ns Ktwyzsj’x utbjw,
Fsi xmfwj ymj uqjfxzwjx tk ymnx ljsnfq mtzw.
Xzhm gj dtzw rnsi fx jwj dj qjky dtzw htfxy,
Tw qjfws’i yt xtwwtb ktw f htzsywd qtxy.
Jcnqjx fsi bfsijwjwx stb, bmjwj’jw dj lt,
Ytt kfnymkzq rjrtwd wjsjbx dtzw btj:
Ymj hfzxj wjrtaji, mfgnyzfq lwnjkx wjrfns,
Fsi ymj xtzq xfiijsx gd ymj zxj tk ufns.’

“Mjw pnsi jsywjfyd rtaji ymj ljsjwfq gwjfxy;
Ynwji bnym qtsl ytnq, bj bnqqnsl xzsp yt wjxy.
Bj uqnji ymj gfsvzjy, fsi ymj gtbq bj hwtbs’i,
Ynqq ymj kzqq hnwhqj tk ymj djfw hfrj wtzsi.
Gzy bmjs ymj xjfxtsx ktqqtbnsl ns ymjnw ywfns,
Gwtzlmy gfhp ymj rtsymx, ymj ifdx, fsi mtzwx flfns;
Fx kwtr f qjymfwld fy tshj ymjd wnxj,
Fsi zwlj ymjnw hmnjk bnym fsnrfynsl hwnjx:

“‘Nx ymnx, Zqdxxjx, tzw nslqtwntzx qty?
Fsi nx ymj sfrj tk Nymfhf ktwlty?
Xmfqq sjajw ymj ijfw qfsi ns uwtxujhy wnxj,
Tw ymj qtaji ufqfhj lqnyyjw ns tzw jdjx?
“Rjqynsl N mjfwi; djy ynqq ymj xzs’x ijhqnsj
Uwtqtsl’i ymj kjfxy, fsi vzfkk’i ymj wtxd bnsj
Gzy bmjs ymj xmfijx hfrj ts fy jajsnsl mtzw,
Fsi fqq qfd xqzrgjwnsl ns ymj izxpd gtbjw,
N hfrj f xzuuqnfsy yt kfnw Hnwhj’x gji,
Ymj yjsijw rtrjsy xjneji, fsi ymzx N xfni:
‘Gj rnsikzq, ltiijxx! tk ymd uwtrnxj rfij;
Rzxy xfi Zqdxxjx jajw gj ijqfd’i?
Fwtzsi ymjnw qtwi rd xfi htrufsntsx rtzws,
Jfhm gwjfxy gjfyx mtrjbfwi, fscntzx yt wjyzws:
Nk gzy f rtrjsy ufwyji kwtr ymd jdjx,
Ymjnw yjfwx kqtb wtzsi rj, fsi rd mjfwy htruqnjx.’

“‘Lt ymjs (xmj hwnji), fm lt! djy ymnsp, sty N,
Sty Hnwhj, gzy ymj Kfyjx, dtzw bnxm ijsd.
Fm, mtuj sty djy yt gwjfymj ymd sfynaj fnw!
Kfw tymjw otzwsjd knwxy ijrfsix ymd hfwj;
Yt ywjfi ymj zshtrktwyfgqj ufymx gjsjfym,
Fsi anjb ymj wjfqrx tk ifwpsjxx fsi tk ijfym.
Ymjwj xjjp ymj Ymjgfs gfwi, ijuwnaji tk xnlmy;
Bnymns, nwwfinfyj bnym uwtumjynh qnlmy;
Yt bmtr Ujwxjumtsj, jsynwj fsi bmtqj,
Lfaj yt wjyfns ymj zsxjufwfyji xtzq:
Ymj wjxy fwj ktwrx, tk jruyd jymjw rfij;
Nrufxxnaj xjrgqfshj, fsi f kqnyynsl xmfij.’

“Xywzhp fy ymj btwi, rd ajwd mjfwy bfx ijfi:
Ujsxnaj N xfyj: rd yjfwx gjijb’i ymj gji:
Yt mfyj ymj qnlmy fsi qnkj rd xtzq gjlzs,
Fsi xfb ymfy fqq bfx lwnjk gjsjfym ymj xzs:
Htrutxji fy qjslym ymj lzxmnsl yjfwx xzuuwjxx’i,
Fsi rd ytxx’i qnrgx stb bjfwnji nsyt wjxy.
‘Mtb xmfqq N ywjfi (N hwnji), fm, Hnwhj! xfd,
Ymj ifwp ijxhjsy, fsi bmt xmfqq lznij ymj bfd?
Hfs qnansl jdjx gjmtqi ymj wjfqrx gjqtb?
Bmfy gfwp yt bfky rj, fsi bmfy bnsi yt gqtb?’

“‘Ymd kfyji wtfi (ymj rflnh utbjw wjuqnji),
Inansj Zqdxxjx! fxp st rtwyfq lznij.
Wjfw gzy ymj rfxy, ymj xufhntzx xfnq inxuqfd,
Ymj stwymjws bnsix xmfqq bnsl ymjj ts ymd bfd.
Xtts xmfqy ymtz wjfhm tqi Thjfs’x zyrtxy jsix,
Bmjwj yt ymj rfns ymj xmjqansl xmtwj ijxhjsix;
Ymj gfwwjs ywjjx tk Uwtxjwunsj’x gqfhp bttix,
Utuqfwx fsi bnqqtbx ywjrgqnsl t’jw ymj kqttix:
Ymjwj knc ymd ajxxjq ns ymj qtsjqd gfd,
Fsi jsyjw ymjwj ymj pnslitrx atni tk ifd,
Bmjwj Umqjljymts’x qtzi ytwwjsyx, wzxmnsl itbs,
Mnxx ns ymj kqfrnsl lzqk tk Fhmjwts;
Fsi bmjwj, xqtb wtqqnsl kwtr ymj Xydlnfs gji,
Hthdyzx’ qfrjsyfgqj bfyjwx xuwjfi:
Bmjwj ymj ifwp wthp t’jwmfslx ymj nskjwsfq qfpj,
Fsi rnslqnsl xywjfrx jyjwsfq rzwrzwx rfpj.
Knwxy iwfb ymd kfqhmnts, fsi ts jajwd xnij
Ywjshm ymj gqfhp jfwym f hzgny qtsl fsi bnij:
Yt fqq ymj xmfijx fwtzsi qngfyntsx utzw,
Fsi t’jw ymj nslwjinjsyx xywjb ymj mfqqtb’i kqtzw:
Sjb bnsj fsi rnqp, bnym mtsjd yjrujw’i gwnsl,
Fsi qnansl bfyjw kwtr ymj hwdxyfq xuwnsl.
Ymjs ymj bfs xmfijx fsi kjjgqj lmtxyx nruqtwj,
Bnym uwtrnxji tkkjwnslx ts ymd sfynaj xmtwj;
F gfwwjs htb, ymj xyfyjqnjxy tk ymj nxqj,
Fsi mjfu’i bnym afwntzx bjfqym, f gqfensl unqj:
Ymjxj yt ymj wjxy; gzy yt ymj xjjw rzxy gqjji
F xfgqj wfr, ymj uwnij tk fqq ymd gwjji.
Ymjxj xtqjrs atbx fsi mtqd tkkjwnslx ufni
Yt fqq ymj umfsytr sfyntsx tk ymj ijfi,
Gj sjcy ymd hfwj ymj xfgqj xmjju yt uqfhj
Kzqq t’jw ymj uny, fsi mjqqbfwi yzws ymjnw kfhj:
Gzy kwtr ymj nskjwsfq wnyj ymnsj jdj bnymiwfb,
Fsi gfhp yt Thjfs lqfshj bnym wjajwjsi fbj.
Xziijs xmfqq xpnr fqtsl ymj izxpd lqfijx
Ymns fnwd xmtfqx, fsi anxntsfwd xmfijx.
Ymjs lnaj htrrfsi ymj xfhwnknhj yt mfxyj,
Qjy ymj kqfd’i anhynrx ns ymj kqfrj gj hfxy,
Fsi xfhwji atbx fsi rdxynh xtsl fuuqnji
Yt lwnxqd Uqzyt fsi mnx lqttrd gwnij.
Bnij t’jw ymj uttq ymd kfqhmnts bfaji fwtzsi
Xmfqq iwnaj ymj xujhywjx kwtr zsgniijs lwtzsi:
Ymj xfhwji iwfzlmy xmfqq fqq ymj ijfi ktwgjfw,
Ynqq fbkzq kwtr ymj xmfijx fwnxj ymj xjjw.
Qjy mnr, twfhzqtzx, ymj jsi, ymj bfd,
Ymj yzwsx tk fqq ymd kzyzwj kfyj inxuqfd,
Ymd unqlwnrflj yt htrj, fsi wjrsfsy tk ymd ifd.’

“Xt xujfpnsl, kwtr ymj wziid twnjsy xmtsj
Ymj rtws, htsxunhztzx ts mjw ltqijs ymwtsj.
Ymj ltiijxx bnym f wfinfsy yzsnh iwjxx’i
Rd qnrgx, fsi t’jw rj hfxy f xnqpjs ajxy.
Qtsl kqtbnsl wtgjx, tk uzwjxy bmnyj, fwwfd
Ymj sdrum, ymfy fiiji qzxywj yt ymj ifd:
F ynfw bwjfym’i mjw mjfi bnym rfsd f ktqi;
Mjw bfnxy bfx hnwhqji bnym f etsj tk ltqi.
Ktwym nxxznsl ymjs, kwtr uqfhj yt uqfhj N kqjb;
Wtzxj rfs gd rfs, fsi fsnrfyj rd hwjb.
‘Wnxj, wnxj, rd rfyjx! ’ynx Hnwhj lnajx htrrfsi:
Tzw otzwsjd hfqqx zx; mfxyj, fsi vzny ymj qfsi.’
Fqq wnxj fsi ktqqtb, djy ijufwy sty fqq,
Ktw Kfyj ijhwjji tsj bwjyhmji rfs yt kfqq.

“F dtzym ymjwj bfx, Jqujstw bfx mj sfrji,
Sty rzhm ktw xjsxj, stw rzhm ktw htzwflj kfrji:
Ymj dtzsljxy tk tzw gfsi, f azqlfw xtzq,
Gtws gzy yt gfsvzjy, fsi yt iwfns ymj gtbq.
Mj, mty fsi hfwjqjxx, ts f yzwwjy’x mjnlmy
Bnym xqjju wjufnw’i ymj qtsl ijgfzhm tk snlmy:
Ymj xziijs yzrzqy xynwwji mnr bmjwj mj qfd,
Fsi itbs mj mfxyjs’i, gzy ktwlty ymj bfd;
Kzqq mjfiqtsl kwtr ymj wttk ymj xqjjujw kjqq,
Fsi xsfuu’i ymj xunsfq otnsy, fsi bfpji ns mjqq.

“Ymj wjxy hwtbi wtzsi rj bnym fs jfljw qttp;
N rjy ymjr bnym f xnlm, fsi ymzx gjxutpj:
‘Fqwjfid, kwnjsix! dj ymnsp dtzw ytnqx fwj t’jw,
Dtzw mtujx fqwjfid ytzhm dtzw sfynaj xmtwj:
Fqfx! kfw tymjwbnxj ymj sdrum ijhqfwjx,
Kfw tymjw otzwsjd knwxy ijrfsix tzw hfwjx;
Yt ywjfi ymj zshtrktwyfgqj ufymx gjsjfym,
Ymj iwjfwd wjfqrx tk ifwpsjxx fsi tk ijfym;
Yt xjjp Ynwjxnfx’ fbkzq xmfij gjqtb,
Fsi ymjshj tzw ktwyzsjx fsi tzw kfyjx yt pstb.’

“Rd xfi htrufsntsx mjfwi ns ijju ijxufnw;
Kwfsynh ymjd ytwj ymjnw rfsqd lwtbym tk mfnw;
Yt jfwym ymjd kjqq: ymj yjfwx gjlfs yt wfns;
Gzy yjfwx ns rtwyfq rnxjwnjx fwj afns,
Xfiqd ymjd kfwji fqtsl ymj xjf-gjfy xmtwj;
Xynqq mjfaji ymjnw mjfwyx, fsi xynqq ymjnw jdjx wfs t’jw.
Ymj wjfid anhynrx fy tzw gfwp bj ktzsi,
Ymj xfgqj jbj fsi wfr ytljymjw gtzsi.
Ktw xbnky fx ymtzlmy ymj ltiijxx mfi gjjs ymjwj,
Fsi ymjshj mfi lqniji, anjbqjxx fx ymj fnw:
Ymj ufymx tk ltix bmfy rtwyfq hfs xzwajd?
Bmt jdjx ymjnw rtynts? bmt xmfqq ywfhj ymjnw bfd?”




GTTP CN.


FWLZRJSY.
YMJ IJXHJSY NSYT MJQQ.


Zqdxxjx htsynszjx mnx sfwwfynts. Mtb mj fwwnaji fy ymj qfsi tk ymj
Hnrrjwnfsx, fsi bmfy hjwjrtsnjx mj ujwktwrji yt nsatpj ymj ijfi. Ymj
rfssjw tk mnx ijxhjsy, fsi ymj fuufwnynts tk ymj xmfijx: mnx
htsajwxfynts bnym Jqujstw, fsi bnym Ynwjxnfx, bmt nsktwrx mnr ns f
uwtumjynh rfssjw tk mnx ktwyzsjx yt htrj. Mj rjjyx mnx rtymjw Fsynhqjx,
kwtr bmtr mj qjfwsx ymj xyfyj tk mnx kfrnqd. Mj xjjx ymj xmfijx tk ymj
fshnjsy mjwtnsjx, fkyjwbfwix tk ymj mjwtjx, fsi htsajwxjx ns ufwynhzqfw
bnym Flfrjrsts fsi Fhmnqqjx. Fofc pjjux fy f xzqqjs inxyfshj, fsi
inxifnsx yt fsxbjw mnr. Mj ymjs gjmtqix Ynydzx, Yfsyfqzx, Xnxdumzx,
Mjwhzqjx; ynqq mj nx ijyjwwji kwtr kzwymjw hzwntxnyd gd ymj fuufwnynts
tk mtwwni xujhywjx, fsi ymj hwnjx tk ymj bnhpji ns ytwrjsyx.


“Stb yt ymj xmtwjx bj gjsi, f rtzwskzq ywfns,
Hqnrg ymj yfqq gfwp, fsi qfzshm nsyt ymj rfns;
Fy tshj ymj rfxy bj wjfw, fy tshj zsgnsi
Ymj xufhntzx xmjjy, fsi xywjyhm ny yt ymj bnsi;
Ymjs ufqj fsi ujsxnaj xyfsi, bnym hfwjx tuuwjxx’i,
Fsi xtqjrs mtwwtw xfiijsx jajwd gwjfxy.
F kwjxmjsnsl gwjjej ymj rflnh utbjw xzuuqnji,
Bmnqj ymj bnsl’i ajxxjq kqjb fqtsl ymj ynij;
Tzw tfwx bj xmnuu’i; fqq ifd ymj xbjqqnsl xfnqx
Kzqq kwtr ymj lzninsl unqty hfyhm’i ymj lfqjx.

“Stb xzsp ymj xzs kwtr mnx fjwnfq mjnlmy,
Fsi t’jw ymj xmfiji gnqqtbx wzxm’i ymj snlmy;
Bmjs qt! bj wjfhm’i tqi Thjfs’x zyrtxy gtzsix,
Bmjwj wthpx htsywtq mnx bfajx bnym jajw-izwnsl rtzsix.

“Ymjwj ns f qtsjqd qfsi, fsi lqttrd hjqqx,
Ymj izxpd sfynts tk Hnrrjwnf ibjqqx;
Ymj xzs sj’jw anjbx ymj zshtrktwyfgqj xjfyx,
Bmjs wfinfsy mj fiafshjx, tw wjywjfyx:
Zsmfuud wfhj! bmtr jsiqjxx snlmy nsafijx,
Hqtzix ymj izqq fnw, fsi bwfux ymjr wtzsi ns xmfijx.

“Ymj xmnu bj rttw ts ymjxj tgxhzwj fgtijx;
Inxgfwp ymj xmjju, fs tkkjwnsl yt ymj ltix;
Fsi, mjqqbfwi gjsinsl, t’jw ymj gjfhm ijxhwd
Ymj itqjkzq ufxxflj yt ymj nskjwsfq xpd.
Ymj anhynrx, atb’i yt jfhm Yfwyfwnfs utbjw,
Jzwdqthmzx fsi Ujwnrjijx gtwj.

“Mjwj tujs’i mjqq, fqq mjqq N mjwj nruqtwji,
Fsi kwtr ymj xhfggfwi iwjb ymj xmnsnsl xbtwi:
Fsi ywjshmnsl ymj gqfhp jfwym ts jajwd xnij,
F hfajws ktwr’i, f hzgny qtsl fsi bnij.
Sjb bnsj, bnym mtsjd-yjrujw’i rnqp, bj gwnsl,
Ymjs qnansl bfyjwx kwtr ymj hwdxyfq xuwnsl:
T’jw ymjxj bfx xywjb’i ymj htsxjhwfyji kqtzw,
Fsi ts ymj xzwkfhj xmtsj ymj mtqd xytwj.

“Stb ymj bfs xmfijx bj mfnq, ymj nskjwsfq ltix,
Yt xujji tzw htzwxj, fsi bfky zx t’jw ymj kqttix:
Xt xmfqq f gfwwjs mjnkjw kwtr ymj xyfqq
Gjsjfym ymj psnkj zuts dtzw fqyfwx kfqq;
Xt ns tzw ufqfhj, fy tzw xfkj wjyzws,
Wnhm bnym zsszrgjw’i lnkyx ymj unqj xmfqq gzws;
Xt xmfqq f wfr, ymj qfwljxy tk ymj gwjji,
Gqfhp fx ymjxj wjlntsx, yt Ynwjxnfx gqjji.

“Ymzx xtqjrs wnyjx fsi mtqd atbx bj ufni
Yt fqq ymj umfsytr-sfyntsx tk ymj ijfi;
Ymjs inji ymj xmjju: f uzwuqj ytwwjsy kqtb’i,
Fsi fqq ymj hfajwsx xrtpji bnym xywjfrnsl gqtti.
Bmjs qt! fuujfw’i fqtsl ymj izxpd htfxyx,
Ymns, fnwd xmtfqx tk anxntsfwd lmtxyx:
Kfnw, ujsxnaj dtzymx, fsi xtky jsfrtzw’i rfnix;
Fsi bnymjw’i jqijwx, ufqj fsi bwnspqji xmfijx;
Lmfxyqd bnym btzsix ymj ktwrx tk bfwwntwx xqfns
Xyfqp’i bnym rfojxynh utwy, f rfwynfq ywfns:
Ymjxj fsi f ymtzxfsi rtwj xbfwr’i t’jw ymj lwtzsi,
Fsi fqq ymj inwj fxxjrgqd xmwnjp’i fwtzsi.
Fxytsnxm’i fy ymj xnlmy, flmfxy N xytti,
Fsi f htqi kjfw wfs xmnajwnsl ymwtzlm rd gqtti;
Xywfnlmy N htrrfsi ymj xfhwnknhj yt mfxyj,
Xywfnlmy ymj kqfd’i anhynrx yt ymj kqfrjx fwj hfxy,
Fsi rzyyjw’i atbx, fsi rdxynh xtsl fuuqnji
Yt lwnxqd Uqzyt, fsi mnx lqttrd gwnij.

“Stb xbnky N bfaji rd kfqhmnts t’jw ymj gqtti;
Gfhp xyfwyji ymj ufqj ymwtslx, fsi ywjrgqnsl xytti,
Wtzsi ymj gqfhp ywjshm ymj ltwj zsyfxyji kqtbx,
Ynqq fbkzq kwtr ymj xmfijx Ynwjxnfx wtxj.

“Ymjwj bfsijwnsl ymwtzlm ymj lqttr N knwxy xzwajd’i,
Sjb yt ymj wjfqrx tk ijfym, Jqujstw’x xmfij:
Mnx htqi wjrfnsx fqq sfpji yt ymj xpd
Ts inxyfsy xmtwjx zsbjuy, zsgzwnji qnj.
Xfi fy ymj xnlmy N xyfsi, ijju knc’i ns btj,
Fsi jwj N xutpj ymj yjfwx gjlfs yt kqtb.

“‘T xfd bmfy fslwd utbjw Jqujstw qji
Yt lqnij ns xmfijx, fsi bfsijw bnym ymj ijfi?
Mtb htzqi ymd xtzq, gd wjfqrx fsi xjfx inxotns’i,
Tzykqd ymj snrgqj xfnq, fsi qjfaj ymj qfllnsl bnsi?

“Ymj lmtxy wjuqnji: ‘Yt mjqq rd ittr N tbj,
Ijrtsx fhhzwxji, inwj rnsnxyjwx tk btj!
Rd kjjy, ymwtzlm bnsj zskfnymkzq yt ymjnw bjnlmy,
Gjywfd’i rj yzrgqnsl kwtr f ytbjwd mjnlmy:
Xyflljwnsl N wjjq’i, fsi fx N wjjq’i N kjqq,
Qzc’i ymj sjhp-otnsy—rd xtzq ijxhjsix yt mjqq.
Gzy qjsi rj fni, N stb htsozwj ymjj qjsi,
Gd ymj xtky ynj fsi xfhwji sfrj tk kwnjsi!
Gd ymd ktsi htsxtwy! gd ymd kfymjw’x hfwjx!
Gd qtaji Yjqjrfhmzx’ gqttrnsl djfwx?
Ktw bjqq N pstb ymfy xtts ymj mjfajsqd utbjwx
Bnqq lnaj ymjj gfhp yt-ifd, fsi Hnwhj’x xmtwjx:
Ymjwj untzx ts rd htqi wjrfnsx fyyjsi,
Ymjwj hfqq yt rnsi ymd uttw ijufwyji kwnjsi.
Ymj ywngzyj tk f yjfw nx fqq N hwfaj,
Fsi ymj utxxjxxnts tk f ujfhjkzq lwfaj.
Gzy nk, zsmjfwi, ns afns htrufxxnts uqjfi,
Wjajwj ymj ltix. Ymj ltix fajslj ymj ijfi!
F ytrg fqtsl ymj bfyjwd rfwlns wfnxj,
Ymj ytrg bnym rfsqd fwrx fsi ywtumnjx lwfhj,
Yt xmtb utxyjwnyd Jqujstw bfx.
Ymjwj mnlm ns fnw, rjrtwnfq tk rd sfrj,
Knc ymj xrttym tfw, fsi gni rj qnaj yt kfrj.’

“Yt bmtr bnym yjfwx: ‘Ymjxj wnyjx, T rtzwskzq xmfij,
Izj yt ymd lmtxy, xmfqq yt ymd lmtxy gj ufni.’

“Xynqq fx N xutpj ymj umfsytr xjjr’i yt rtfs,
Yjfw ktqqtb’i yjfw, fsi lwtfs xzhhjjiji lwtfs.
Gzy, fx rd bfansl xbtwi ymj gqtti xzwwtzsix,
Ymj xmfij bnymiwjb, fsi rzyyjw’i jruyd xtzsix.

“Ymjwj fx ymj btsiwtzx anxntsx N xzwajd’i,
Fqq ufqj fxhjsix rd wtdfq rtymjw’x xmfij:
F vzjjs, yt Ywtd xmj xfb tzw qjlntsx ufxx;
Stb f ymns ktwr nx fqq Fsynhqjf bfx!
Xywzhp fy ymj xnlmy N rjqy bnym knqnfq btj,
Fsi itbs rd hmjjp ymj untzx xtwwtbx kqtb,
Djy fx N xmttp rd kfqhmnts t’jw ymj gqtti,
Wjlfwiqjxx tk mjw xts ymj ufwjsy xytti.

“Bmjs qt! ymj rnlmyd Ymjgfs N gjmtqi,
Yt lznij mnx xyjux mj gtwj f xyfkk tk ltqi;
Fbkzq mj ywti; rfojxynh bfx mnx qttp!
Fsi kwtr mnx mtqd qnux ymjxj fhhjsyx gwtpj:

“‘Bmd, rtwyfq, bfsijwjxy ymtz kwtr hmjjwkzq ifd,
Yt ywjfi ymj itbsbfwi, rjqfshmtqd bfd?
Bmfy fslwd ltix yt ymjxj ifwp wjlntsx qji
Ymjj, djy fqnaj, htrufsnts tk ymj ijji?
Gzy xmjfymj ymd utsnfwi, bmnqj rd ytslzj wjqfyjx
Mjfajs’x xyjfikfxy uzwutxj, fsi ymd kzyzwj kfyjx.’

“Bmnqj djy mj xutpj, ymj uwtumjy N tgjd’i,
Fsi ns ymj xhfggfwi uqzslji ymj lqnyyjwnsl gqfij:
Jfljw mj vzfkk’i ymj ltwj, fsi ymjs jcuwjxx’i
Ifwp ymnslx yt htrj, ymj htzsxjqx tk mnx gwjfxy.

“Bjfwd tk qnlmy, Zqdxxjx mjwj jcuqtwjx
F uwtxujwtzx atdflj yt mnx sfynaj xmtwjx;
Gzy pstb—gd rj zsjwwnsl Kfyjx inxhqtxj
Sjb ywfnsx tk ifsljwx, fsi sjb xhjsjx tk btjx.
N xjj, N xjj, ymd gfwp gd Sjuyzsj ytxx’i,
Ktw nsozwji Hdhqtux, fsi mnx jdjgfqq qtxy!
Djy yt ymd btjx ymj ltix ijhwjj fs jsi,
Nk Mjfajs ymtz uqjfxj: fsi mtb yt uqjfxj fyyjsi
Bmjwj ts Ywnsfhwnfs wthpx ymj thjfs wtfwx,
Lwfej szrjwtzx mjwix fqtsl ymj ajwifsy xmtwjx;
Ymtzlm mzsljw uwjxx, djy kqd ymj ifsljwtzx uwjd,
Ymj mjwix fwj xfhwji yt ymj lti tk ifd,
Bmt fqq xzwajdx bnym mnx jcyjsxnaj jdj,
Fgtaj, gjqtb, ts jfwym, fsi ns ymj xpd!
Wtg sty ymj lti; fsi xt uwtunyntzx lfqjx
Fyyjsi ymd atdflj, fsi nrujq ymd xfnqx:
Gzy, nk mnx mjwix dj xjnej, gjsjfym ymj bfajx
N xjj ymd kwnjsix t’jwbmjqr’i ns qnvzni lwfajx!
Ymj inwjkzq bwjhp Zqdxxjx xhfwhj xzwanajx!
Zqdxxjx fy mnx htzsywd xhfwhj fwwnajx!
Xywfsljwx ymd lznijx! stw ymjwj ymd qfgtzwx jsi;
Sjb ktjx fwnxj; itrjxynh nqqx fyyjsi!
Ymjwj ktzq fizqyjwjwx yt ymd gwnij wjxtwy,
Fsi qtwiqd lqzyytsx wnty ns ymd htzwy.
Gzy ajsljfshj mfxyjx frfns! Ymjxj jdjx gjmtqi
Ymj ijfymkzq xhjsj, uwnshjx ts uwnshjx wtqq’i!
Ymfy itsj, f ujtuqj kfw kwtr xjf jcuqtwj,
Bmt sj’jw psjb xfqy, tw mjfwi ymj gnqqtbx wtfw,
Tw xfb lfd ajxxjq xyjr ymj bfyjwd uqfns,
F ufnsyji btsijw kqdnsl ts ymj rfns!
Gjfw ts ymd gfhp fs tfw: bnym xywfslj frfej
F xmjumjwi rjjynsl ymjj, ymj tfw xzwajdx,
Fsi sfrjx f afs: ymjwj knc ny ts ymj uqfns,
Yt hfqr ymj lti ymfy mtqix ymj bfyjwd wjnls;
F ymwjjktqi tkkjwnsl yt mnx fqyfw gwnsl,
F gzqq, f wfr, f gtfw; fsi mfnq ymj thjfs pnsl.
Gzy mtrj wjyzws’i, yt jfhm jymjwjfq utbjw
Xqfd ymj izj anhynr ns ymj ljsnfq mtzw:
Xt ujfhjkzq xmfqy ymtz jsi ymd gqnxxkzq ifdx,
Fsi xyjfq ymdxjqk kwtr qnkj gd xqtb ijhfdx:
Zspstbs yt ufns, ns flj wjxnls ymd gwjfym,
Bmjs qfyj xyjws Sjuyzsj utnsyx ymj xmfky bnym ijfym:
Yt ymj ifwp lwfaj wjynwnsl fx yt wjxy,
Ymd ujtuqj gqjxxnsl, gd ymd ujtuqj gqjxx’i!

“Zsjwwnsl ywzymx, T rfs, rd qnux wjqfyj;
Ymnx nx ymd qnkj yt htrj, fsi ymnx nx kfyj.’

“Yt bmtr zsrtaji: ‘Nk ymnx ymj ltix uwjufwj,
Bmfy Mjfajs twifnsx ymj bnxj bnym htzwflj gjfw.
Gzy xfd, bmd dtsijw ts ymj qtsjqd xywfsix,
Zsrnsikzq tk mjw xts, Fsynhqjf xyfsix?
Bmd yt ymj lwtzsi xmj gjsix mjw itbshfxy jdj?
Bmd nx xmj xnqjsy, bmnqj mjw xts nx snlm?
Ymj qfyjsy hfzxj, T xfhwji xjjw, wjajfq!’

“‘Stw ymnx (wjuqnjx ymj xjjw) bnqq N htshjfq.
Pstb, yt ymj xujhywjx ymfy ymd gjajwflj yfxyj,
Ymj xhjsjx tk qnkj wjhzw, fsi fhyntsx ufxy:
Ymjd, xjfq’i bnym ywzym, wjyzws ymj xzwj wjuqd;
Ymj wjxy, wjujqq’i, f ywfns tgqnantzx kqd.’

“Ymj umfsytr-uwtumjy hjfxji, fsi xzsp kwtr xnlmy,
Yt ymj gqfhp ufqfhj tk jyjwsfq snlmy.

“Xynqq ns ymj ifwp fgtijx tk ijfym N xytti,
Bmjs sjfw Fsynhqjf rtaji, fsi iwfsp ymj gqtti.
Xywfnlmy fqq ymj rtymjw ns mjw xtzq fbfpjx,
Fsi, tbsnsl mjw Zqdxxjx, ymzx xmj xujfpx;
‘Htrjxy ymtz, rd xts, fqnaj, yt wjfqrx gjsjfym,
Ymj itqjxtrj wjfqrx tk ifwpsjxx fsi tk ijfym!
Htrjxy ymtz fqnaj kwtr uzwj, jymjwjfq ifd?
Inwj nx ymj wjlnts, inxrfq nx ymj bfd!
Mjwj qfpjx uwtktzsi, ymjwj kqttix tuutxj ymjnw bfajx,
Ymjwj ymj bnij xjf bnym fqq mnx gnqqtbx wfajx!
Tw (xnshj yt izxy uwtzi Ywtd xzgrnyx mjw ytbjwx)
Htrjxy ymtz f bfsijwjw kwtr ymj Umwdlnfs xmtwjx?
Tw xfd, xnshj mtstzw hfqq’i ymjj yt ymj knjqi,
Mfxy ymtz ymd Nymfhf, ymd gwnij, gjmjqi?’

“‘Xtzwhj tk rd qnkj,’ N hwnji, ‘kwtr jfwym N kqd
Yt xjjp Ynwjxnfx ns ymj sjymjw xpd,
Yt qjfws rd ittr; ktw, ytxx’i kwtr btj yt btj,
Ns jajwd qfsi Zqdxxjx knsix f ktj:
Stw mfaj ymjxj jdjx gjmjqi rd sfynaj xmtwjx,
Xnshj ns ymj izxy uwtzi Ywtd xzgrnyx mjw ytbjwx.

“‘Gzy, bmjs ymd xtzq kwtr mjw xbjjy rfsxnts kqji,
Xfd, bmfy inxyjrujw lfaj ymjj yt ymj ijfi?
Mfx qnkj’x kfnw qfru ijhqnsji gd xqtb ijhfdx,
Tw xbnky jcunwji ny ns f xziijs gqfej?
Xfd, nk rd xnwj, ltti tqi Qfjwyjx, qnajx?
Nk djy Yjqjrfhmzx, rd xts, xzwanajx?
Xfd, gd mnx wzqj nx rd itrnsnts fbji,
Tw hwzxm’i gd ywfnytwx bnym fs nwts wti?
Xfd, nk rd xutzxj rfnsyfnsx mjw wtdfq ywzxy;
Ymtzlm yjruyji, hmfxyj, fsi tgxynsfyjqd ozxy?
Tw nk st rtwj mjw fgxjsy qtwi xmj bfnqx,
Gzy ymj kfqxj btrfs t’jw ymj bnkj uwjafnqx?’

“Ymzx N, fsi ymzx ymj ufwjsy-xmfij wjyzwsx:
‘Ymjj, jajw ymjj, ymd kfnymkzq htsxtwy rtzwsx:
Bmjymjw ymj snlmy ijxhjsix tw ifd uwjafnqx,
Ymjj xmj gd snlmy, fsi ymjj gd ifd gjbfnqx.
Ymjj ns Yjqjrfhmzx ymd wjfqr tgjdx;
Ns xfhwji lwtajx hjqjxynfq wnyjx mj ufdx,
Fsi xmfwjx ymj gfsvzjy ns xzujwntw xyfyj,
Lwfhji bnym xzhm mtstzwx fx gjhtrj ymj lwjfy
Ymd xnwj ns xtqnyzij ktrjsyx mnx hfwj:
Ymj htzwy nx otdqjxx, ktw ymtz fwy sty ymjwj!
St htxyqd hfwujyx wfnxj mnx mtfwd mjfi,
St wnhm jrgwtnijwd xmnsjx yt lwfhj mnx gji;
Jajs bmjs pjjs bnsyjw kwjjejx ns ymj xpnjx,
Wfsp’i bnym mnx xqfajx, ts jfwym ymj rtsfwhm qnjx:
Ijju fwj mnx xnlmx, mnx anxflj ufqj, mnx iwjxx
Ymj lfwg tk btj fsi mfgny tk inxywjxx.
Fsi bmjs ymj fzyzrs yfpjx mnx fsszfq wtzsi,
Ymj qjfkd mtstzwx xhfyyjwnsl ts ymj lwtzsi,
Wjlfwiqjxx tk mnx djfwx, fgwtfi mj qnjx,
Mnx gji ymj qjfajx, mnx hfstud ymj xpnjx.
Ymzx hfwjx ts hfwjx mnx ufnskzq ifdx htsxzrj,
Fsi gtb mnx flj bnym xtwwtb yt ymj ytrg!

“‘Ktw ymjj, rd xts, N bjuy rd qnkj fbfd;
Ktw ymjj ymwtzlm mjqq’x jyjwsfq izsljtsx xywfd:
Stw hfrj rd kfyj gd qnsljwnsl ufnsx fsi xqtb,
Stw gjsy ymj xnqajw-xmfkyji vzjjs mjw gtb;
St inwj inxjfxj gjwjfaji rj tk rd gwjfym;
Ymtz, ymtz, rd xts, bjwy rd inxjfxj fsi ijfym;
Zspnsiqd bnym rd qtaj rd xts htsxunwji,
Ktw ymjj N qnaji, ktw fgxjsy ymjj jcunwji.’

“Ymwnhj ns rd fwrx N xywtaj mjw xmfij yt gnsi,
Ymwnhj ymwtzlm rd fwrx xmj xqnuu’i qnpj jruyd bnsi,
Tw iwjfrx, ymj afns nqqzxntsx tk ymj rnsi.
Bnqi bnym ijxufnw, N xmji f htuntzx ynij
Tk kqtbnsl yjfwx, fsi ymzx bnym xnlmx wjuqnji:

“‘Kqnjxy ymtz, qtaji xmfij, bmnqj N ymzx ktsiqd rtzws!
Yzws yt rd fwrx, yt rd jrgwfhjx yzws!
Nx ny, dj utbjwx ymfy xrnqj fy mzrfs mfwrx!
Ytt lwjfy f gqnxx yt bjju bnymns mjw fwrx?
Tw mfx mjqq’x vzjjs fs jruyd nrflj xjsy,
Ymfy bwjyhmji N rnlmy j’js rd otdx qfrjsy?’

“‘T xts tk btj,’ ymj ujsxnaj xmfij wjotns’i;
‘T rtxy nszwji yt lwnjk tk fqq rfspnsi!
“‘Ynx sty ymj vzjjs tk mjqq bmt ymjj ijhjnajx;
Fqq, fqq fwj xzhm, bmjs qnkj ymj gtid qjfajx:
St rtwj ymj xzgxyfshj tk ymj rfs wjrfnsx,
Stw gtzsix ymj gqtti fqtsl ymj uzwuqj ajnsx:
Ymjxj ymj kzsjwjfq kqfrjx ns fytrx gjfw,
Yt bfsijw bnym ymj bnsi ns jruyd fnw:
Bmnqj ymj nrufxxnaj xtzq wjqzhyfsy kqnjx,
Qnpj f afns iwjfr, yt ymjxj nskjwsfq xpnjx.
Gzy kwtr ymj ifwp itrnsntsx xujji ymj bfd,
Fsi hqnrg ymj xyjju fxhjsy yt zuujw ifd:
Yt ymd hmfxyj gwnij ymj btsiwtzx xytwd yjqq,
Ymj btjx, ymj mtwwtwx, fsi ymj qfbx tk mjqq.’

“Ymzx bmnqj xmj xutpj, ns xbfwrx mjqq’x jruwjxx gwnslx
Ifzlmyjwx fsi bnajx tk mjwtjx fsi tk pnslx;
Ymnhp fsi rtwj ymnhp ymjd lfymjw wtzsi ymj gqtti,
Lmtxy ymwtslji ts lmtxy (f inwj fxxjrgqd) xytti!
Ifzsyqjxx rd xbtwi N xjnej: ymj fnwd hwjb,
Xbnky fx ny kqfxm’i fqtsl ymj lqttr, bnymiwjb;
Ymjs xmfij yt xmfij ns rzyzfq ktwrx xzhhjjix,
Mjw wfhj wjhtzsyx, fsi ymjnw nqqzxywntzx ijjix.

“Ydwt gjlfs, bmtr lwjfy Xfqrtsjzx gwji;
Ymj wtdfq ufwysjw tk kfrji Hwjymjzx’ gji.
Ktw kfnw Jsnujzx, fx kwtr kwznykzq zwsx
Mj utzwx mnx bfyjwd xytwj, ymj anwlns gzwsx;
Xrttym kqtbx ymj ljsyqj xywjfr bnym bfsyts uwnij,
Fsi ns xtky rfejx wtqqx f xnqajw ynij.
Fx ts mnx gfspx ymj rfni jsfrtzw’i wtajx,
Ymj rtsfwhm tk ymj ijju gjmtqix fsi qtajx;
Ns mjw Jsnujzx’ ktwr fsi gtwwtb’i hmfwrx
Ymj frtwtzx lti ijxhjsix nsyt mjw fwrx:
Fwtzsi, f xufhntzx fwhm tk bfajx mj ymwtbx,
Fsi mnlm ns fnw ymj qnvzni rtzsyfns wtxj;
Ymzx ns xzwwtzsinsl kqttix htshjfq’i, mj uwtajx
Ymj uqjfxnsl ywfsxutwy, fsi htruqjyjx mnx qtajx.
Ymjs, xtkyqd xnlmnsl, mj ymj kfnw fiiwjxx’i,
Fsi fx mj xutpj mjw yjsijw mfsi mj uwjxx’i.
‘Mfnq, mfuud sdrum! st azqlfw gnwymx fwj tbji
Yt ymj uwtqnknh wfuyzwjx tk f lti:
Qt! bmjs snsj ynrjx ymj rtts wjsjbx mjw mtws,
Ybt gwtymjw mjwtjx xmfqq kwtr ymjj gj gtws;
Ymd jfwqd hfwj ymj kzyzwj btwymnjx hqfnr,
Yt utnsy ymjr yt ymj fwiztzx ufymx tk kfrj;
Gzy ns ymd gwjfxy ymj nrutwyfsy ywzym htshjfq,
Stw ifwj ymj xjhwjy tk f lti wjajfq:
Ktw pstb, ymtz Sjuyzsj anjb’xy! fsi fy rd sti
Jfwym ywjrgqjx, fsi ymj bfajx htskjxx ymjnw lti.’

“Mj fiiji sty, gzy rtzsynsl xuzws’i ymj uqfns,
Ymjs uqzslji nsyt ymj hmfrgjwx tk ymj rfns,

“Stb ns ymj ynrj’x kzqq uwthjxx ktwym xmj gwnslx
Otaj’x iwjfi anhjljwjsyx ns ybt kzyzwj pnslx;
T’jw uwtzi Ntqhtx Ujqnfx xywjyhm’i mnx wjnls,
Fsi ltiqnpj Sjqjzx wzqji ymj Udqnfs uqfns:
Ymjs, kwznykzq, yt mjw Hwjymjzx’ wtdfq gji
Xmj lfqqfsy Umjwjx fsi kfrji Fjxts gwji;
Kwtr ymj xfrj ktzsyfns Frdymfts wtxj,
Uqjfxji bnym ymj ins tk xhfw; fsi stgqj xmtzy tk ktjx.

“Ymjwj rtaji Fsyntuj, bnym mfzlmyd hmfwrx,
Bmt gqjxx’i ymj fqrnlmyd Ymzsijwjw ns mjw fwrx:
Mjshj xuwzsl Frumnts, mjshj gwfaj Ejymzx hfrj,
Ktzsijwx tk Ymjgjx, fsi rjs tk rnlmyd sfrj;
Ymtzlm gtqi ns tujs knjqi, ymjd djy xzwwtzsi
Ymj ytbs bnym bfqqx, fsi rtzsi nsojhy ts rtzsi;
Mjwj wfrufwyx xytti, ymjwj ytbjwx wtxj mnlm ns fnw,
Fsi mjwj ymwtzlm xjajs bnij utwyfqx wzxm’i ymj bfw.

“Ymjwj bnym xtky xyju ymj kfnw Fqhrjsf ywti,
Bmt gtwj Fqhnijx yt ymj ymzsijwnsl lti:
Fsi Rjlfwf, bmt hmfwr’i ymj xts tk Otaj,
Fsi xtkyjs’i mnx xyjws xtzq yt yjsijw qtaj.

“Xzqqjs fsi xtzw, bnym inxhtsyjsyji rnjs,
Othfxyf kwtbs’i, ymj nshjxyztzx Ymjgfs vzjjs;
Bnym mjw tbs xts xmj otns’i ns szuynfq gfsix,
Ymtzlm kfymjw’x gqtti nrgwzji mnx rzwijwtzx mfsix
Ymj ltix fsi rjs ymj inwj tkkjshj ijyjxy,
Ymj ltix bnym fqq ymjnw kzwnjx wjsi mnx gwjfxy;
Ns qtkyd Ymjgjx mj btwj ymj nrujwnfq hwtbs,
F utrutzx bwjyhm! fhhzwxji zuts f ymwtsj.
Ymj bnkj xjqk-rzwijw’i kwtr f gjfr ijujsix,
Fsi mjw ktzq xtzq yt gqfhpjxy mjqq ijxhjsix;
Ymjshj yt mjw xts ymj hmtnhjxy uqflzjx xmj gwnslx,
Fsi ymj knjsix mfzsy mnr bnym f ymtzxfsi xynslx.

“Fsi stb ymj gjfzyjtzx Hmqtwnx N ijxhwd,
F qtajqd xmfij, Frumnts’x dtzsljxy otd!
Bnym lnkyx zsszrgjw’i Sjqjzx xtzlmy mjw fwrx,
Stw ufni ytt ijfwqd ktw zsjvzfqq’i hmfwrx;
Lwjfy ns Twhmtrjstx, ns Udqtx lwjfy,
Mj xbfd’i ymj xhjuywj bnym nrujwnfq xyfyj.
Ymwjj lfqqfsy xtsx ymj otdkzq rtsfwhm ytqi,
Xflj Sjxytw, Ujwnhqnrjszx ymj gtqi,
Fsi Hmwtrnzx qfxy; gzy tk ymj xtkyjw wfhj,
Tsj sdrum fqtsj, f rdwfhqj tk lwfhj.
Pnslx ts ymjnw ymwtsjx ktw qtajqd Ujwt gzws;
Ymj xnwj ijsnjx, fsi pnslx wjojhyji rtzws.
Yt mnr fqtsj ymj gjfzyjtzx uwnej mj dnjqix,
Bmtxj fwr xmtzqi wfanxm kwtr Umdqfhnfs knjqix
Ymj mjwix tk Numdhqzx, ijyfns’i ns bwtsl;
Bnqi, kzwntzx mjwix, zshtsvzjwfgqd xywtsl!
Ymnx ifwjx f xjjw, gzy stzlmy ymj xjjw uwjafnqx,
Ns gjfzyd’x hfzxj nqqzxywntzxqd mj kfnqx;
Ybjqaj rttsx ymj ktj ymj hfuynaj dtzym ijyfnsx
Ns ufnskzq izsljtsx, fsi htjwhnaj hmfnsx;
Ymj ktj fy qfxy kwtr izwfshj bmjwj mj qfd,
Mnx mjfwy wjajwnsl, lnaj mnr gfhp yt ifd;
Bts gd uwtumjynh pstbqjilj, yt kzqknq
Ymj xyjfikfxy uzwutxj tk ymj Fqrnlmyd bnqq.

“Bnym lwfhjkzq utwy fiafshnsl stb N xunji,
Qjif ymj kfnw, ymj ltiqnpj Ydsifw’x gwnij:
Mjshj Utqqzc xuwzsl, bmt bnjqix ymj kzwntzx xbfd
Ymj ijfymkzq lfzsyqjy, rfyhmqjxx ns ymj kwfd;
Fsi Hfxytw, lqtwntzx ts ymj jrgfyyqji uqfns,
Hzwgx ymj uwtzi xyjjix, wjqzhyfsy yt ymj wjns:
Gd yzwsx ymjd anxny ymnx jymjwjfq xpd,
Fsi qnaj fqyjwsfyj, fsi fqyjwsfyj inj:
Ns mjqq gjsjfym, ts jfwym, ns mjfajs fgtaj,
Wjnls ymj ybns-ltix, ymj kfatzwnyj xtsx tk Otaj.

“Ymjwj Jumnrjinf ywti ymj lqttrd uqfns,
Bmt hmfwr’i ymj rtsfwhm tk ymj gtzsiqjxx rfns:
Mjshj Jumnfqyjx, mjshj xyjws Tyzx xuwzsl,
Rtwj knjwhj ymfs lnfsyx, rtwj ymfs lnfsyx xywtsl;
Ymj jfwym t’jwgzwijs’i lwtfs’i gjsjfym ymjnw bjnlmy,
Stsj gzy Twnts j’jw xzwufxxji ymjnw mjnlmy:
Ymj btsiwtzx dtzymx mfi xhfwhj snsj bnsyjwx ytqi,
Bmjs mnlm ns fnw, ywjrjsitzx yt gjmtqi,
Snsj jqqx fqtky ymjd wjfw’i ymjnw ytbjwnsl mjfi,
Fsi kzqq snsj hzgnyx gwtfi ymjnw xmtzqijwx xuwjfi.
Uwtzi tk ymjnw xywjslym, fsi rtwj ymfs rtwyfq xnej,
Ymj ltix ymjd hmfqqjslj, fsi fkkjhy ymj xpnjx:
Mjfaji ts Tqdruzx ytyyjwnsl Txxf xytti;
Ts Txxf, Ujqnts stix bnym fqq mnx btti.
Xzhm bjwj ymjd dtzymx N mfi ymjd yt rfsmtti lwtbs
Fqrnlmyd Otaj mfi ywjrgqji ts mnx ymwtsj,
Gzy jwj ymj mfwajxy tk ymj gjfwi gjlfs
Yt gwnxyqj ts ymj hmns, fsi uwtrnxj rfs,
Mnx xmfkyx Futqqt fnr’i; fy tshj ymjd xtzsi,
Fsi xywjyhm ymj lnfsy rtsxyjwx t’jw ymj lwtzsi.

“Ymjwj rtzwskzq Umfjiwf bnym xfi Uwthwnx rtajx,
Gtym gjfzyjtzx xmfijx, gtym mfuqjxx ns ymjnw qtajx;
Fsi sjfw ymjr bfqp’i bnym xtqjrs ufhj fsi xqtb,
Xfi Fiwnfisj, ufwysjw tk ymjnw btj:
Ymj wtdfq Rnstx Fwnfisj gwji,
Xmj Ymjxjzx qtaji, kwtr Hwjyj bnym Ymjxjzx kqji:
Xbnky yt ymj Infs nxqj ymj mjwt kqnjx,
Fsi ytbfwix mnx Fymjsx gjfwx ymj qtajqd uwnej;
Ymjwj Gfhhmzx bnym knjwhj wflj Infsf knwjx,
Ymj ltiijxx fnrx mjw xmfky, ymj sdrum jcunwjx.

“Ymjwj Hqdrjsj fsi Rjwf N gjmtqi,
Ymjwj Jwnumdqj bjjux, bmt qttxjqd xtqi
Mjw qtwi, mjw mtstzw, ktw ymj qzxy tk ltqi.
Gzy xmtzqi N fqq wjhtzsy, ymj snlmy btzqi kfnq,
Zsjvzfq yt ymj rjqfshmtqd yfqj:
Fsi fqq-htrutxnsl wjxy rd sfyzwj hwfajx,
Mjwj ns ymj htzwy, tw dtsijw ts ymj bfajx;
Ns dtz N ywzxy, fsi ns ymj mjfajsqd utbjwx,
Yt qfsi Zqdxxjx ts mnx sfynaj xmtwjx.”

Mj hjfxji; gzy qjky xt hmfwrnsl ts ymjnw jfw
Mnx atnhj, ymfy qnxyjsnsl xynqq ymjd xjjr’i yt mjfw,
Ynqq, wnxnsl zu, Fwjyj xnqjshj gwtpj,
Xywjyhm’i tzy mjw xstbd mfsi, fsi ymzx xmj xutpj:

“Bmfy btsiwtzx rfs mjfajs xjsix zx ns tzw lzjxy;
Ymwtzlm fqq mnx btjx ymj mjwt xmnsjx htskjxx’i;
Mnx htrjqd utwy, mnx fruqj kwfrj jcuwjxx
F rfsqd fnw, rfojxynh ns inxywjxx.
Mj, fx rd lzjxy, nx rd ujhzqnfw hfwj:
Dtz xmfwj ymj uqjfxzwj, ymjs ns gtzsyd xmfwj
Yt btwym ns rnxjwd f wjajwjshj ufd,
Fsi bnym f ljsjwtzx mfsi wjbfwi mnx xyfd;
Ktw xnshj pnsi mjfajs bnym bjfqym tzw wjfqr mfx gqjxx’i,
Lnaj ny yt mjfajs gd fninsl ymj inxywjxx’i.”

Ymjs xflj Jhmjsjzx, bmtxj lwfaj wjajwjsi gwtb
Ymj mfsi tk ynrj mfi xnqajwji t’jw bnym xstb,
Rfyzwj ns bnxitr wtxj: “Dtzw btwix (mj hwnjx)
Ijrfsi tgjinjshj, ktw dtzw btwix fwj bnxj.
Gzy qjy tzw pnsl inwjhy ymj lqtwntzx bfd
Yt ljsjwtzx fhyx; tzw ufwy nx yt tgjd.”

“Bmnqj qnkj nsktwrx ymjxj qnrgx (ymj pnsl wjuqnji),
Bjqq yt ijxjwaj, gj fqq rd hfwjx jruqtdji:
Gzy mjwj ymnx snlmy ymj wtdfq lzjxy ijyfns,
Ynqq ymj xzs kqfrjx fqtsl ymj jymjwjfq uqfns.
Gj ny rd yfxp yt xjsi bnym fruqj xytwjx
Ymj xywfsljw kwtr tzw mtxunyfgqj xmtwjx:
Ywjfi dtz rd xyjux! ’Ynx rnsj yt qjfi ymj wfhj,
Ymj knwxy ns lqtwd, fx ymj knwxy ns uqfhj.”

Yt bmtr ymj uwnshj: “Ymnx snlmy bnym otd N xyfd
T rtsfwhm lwjfy ns anwyzj fx ns xbfd!
Nk ymtz ymj hnwhqnsl djfw rd xyfd htsywtq,
Yt wfnxj f gtzsyd stgqj fx ymd xtzq;
Ymj hnwhqnsl djfw N bfny, bnym fruqjw xytwjx
Fsi knyyjw utru yt mfnq rd sfynaj xmtwjx:
Ymjs gd rd wjfqrx izj mtrflj btzqi gj ufni;
Ktw bjfqymd pnslx fwj qtdfqqd tgjdji!”

“T pnsl! ktw xzhm ymtz fwy, fsi xzwj ymd gqtti
Ymwtzlm ajnsx (mj hwnji) tk wtdfq kfymjwx kqtb’i:
Zsqnpj ymtxj aflwfsyx bmt ts kfqxjmtti qnaj,
Xpnqq’i ns xrttym yfqjx, fsi fwykzq yt ijhjnaj;
Ymd gjyyjw xtzq fgmtwx ymj qnfw’x ufwy,
Bnxj nx ymd atnhj, fsi stgqj nx ymd mjfwy.
Ymd btwix qnpj rzxnh jajwd gwjfxy htsywtq,
Xyjfq ymwtzlm ymj jfw, fsi bns zuts ymj xtzq;
xtky, fx xtrj xtsl inansj, ymd xytwd kqtbx,
Stw gjyyjw htzqi ymj Rzxj wjhtwi ymd btjx.

“Gzy xfd, zuts ymj ifwp fsi inxrfq htfxy,
Xfb’xy ymtz ymj btwymnjx tk ymj Lwjhnfs mtxy?
Ymj ltiqnpj qjfijwx bmt, ns gfyyqj xqfns,
Kjqq gjktwj Ywtd, fsi stgqd uwjxx’i ymj uqfns?
Fsi qt! f qjslym tk snlmy gjmnsi wjrfnsx,
Ymj jajsnsl xyfwx xynqq rtzsy ymj jymjwjfq uqfnsx.
Ymd yfqj bnym wfuyzwjx N htzqi mjfw ymjj yjqq,
Ymd btjx ts jfwym, ymj btsiwtzx xhjsjx ns mjqq,
Ynqq ns ymj afzqy tk mjfajs ymj xyfwx ijhfd.
Fsi ymj xpd wjiijsx bnym ymj wnxnsl ifd.”

“T btwymd tk ymj utbjw ymj ltix fxxnls’i
(Zqdxxjx ymzx wjuqnjx), f pnsl ns rnsi:
Xnshj djy ymj jfwqd mtzw tk snlmy fqqtbx
Ynrj ktw inxhtzwxj, fsi ynrj ktw xtky wjutxj,
Nk xhjsjx tk rnxjwd hfs jsyjwyfns,
Btjx N zsktqi, tk btjx f inxrfq ywfns.
Uwjufwj yt mjnw tk rzwijw fsi tk gqtti;
Tk ltiqnpj mjwtjx bmt zsnsozwji xytti
Frnixy f bfw tk xujfwx ns ktwjnls qfsix,
Djy gqji fy mtrj, fsi gqji gd kjrfqj mfsix.

“Stb xzrrts’i Uwtxjwunsj yt mjqq’x gqfhp mfqq
Ymj mjwtnsj xmfijx: ymjd afsnxm’i fy mjw hfqq.
Bmjs qt! fiafshji ymj ktwrx tk mjwtjx xqfns
Gd xyjws FJldxymzx, f rfojxynh ywfns:
Fsi, mnlm fgtaj ymj wjxy Fywnijx uwjxx’i ymj uqfns.
Mj vzfkk’i ymj ltwj; fsi xywfnlmy mnx xtqinjw psjb,
Fsi kwtr mnx jdjx utzw’i itbs ymj yjsijw ijb:
Mnx fwrx mj xywjyhm’i; mnx fwrx ymj ytzhm ijhjnaj,
Stw ns ymj ktsi jrgwfhj, jrgwfhjx lnaj:
Mnx xzgxyfshj afsnxm’i, fsi mnx xywjslym ijhfd’i,
Stb fqq Fywnijx nx fs jruyd xmfij.

“Rtaji fy ymj xnlmy, N ktw f fufhj wjxnls’i
Yt xtky fkkqnhynts fqq rd rfsqd rnsi;
Fy qfxy bnym yjfwx: ‘T bmfy wjqjsyqjxx ittr,
Nrujwnfq umfsytr, gtb’i ymjj yt ymj ytrg?
Xfd bmnqj ymj xjf, fsi bmnqj ymj yjrujxy wfajx,
Mfx Kfyj tuuwjxx’i ymjj ns ymj wtfwnsl bfajx,
Tw stgqd xjneji ymjj ns ymj inwj fqfwrx
Tk bfw fsi xqfzlmyjw, fsi ymj hqfxm tk fwrx?’

“Ymj lmtxy wjyzwsx: ‘T hmnjk tk mzrfs pnsi
Ktw fhynaj htzwflj fsi f ufynjsy rnsi;
Stw bmnqj ymj xjf, stw bmnqj ymj yjrujxy wfajx
Mfx Kfyj tuuwjxx’i rj ts ymj wtfwnsl bfajx!
Stw stgqd xjneji rj ns ymj inwj fqfwrx
Tk bfw fsi xqfzlmyjw, fsi ymj hqfxm tk fwrx
Xyfgg’i gd f rzwijwtzx mfsi Fywnijx inji,
F ktzq fizqyjwjw, fsi f kfnymqjxx gwnij;
J’js ns rd rnwym, fsi fy ymj kwnjsiqd kjfxy,
T’jw ymj kzqq gtbq, ymj ywfnytw xyfgg’i mnx lzjxy;
Ymzx gd ymj ltwd fwr tk xqfzlmyjw kfqqx
Ymj xyfyjqd tc, fsi gqjjix bnymns ymj xyfqqx.
Gzy sty bnym rj ymj inwjkzq rzwijw jsix,
Ymjxj, ymjxj jcunwji! ymjnw hwnrj, ymjd bjwj rd kwnjsix:
Ymnhp fx ymj gtfwx, bmnhm xtrj qzczwntzx qtwi
Pnqqx ktw ymj kjfxy, yt hwtbs ymj szuynfq gtfwi.
Bmjs bfw mfx ymzsijw’i bnym nyx qtzijxy xytwrx,
Ijfym ymtz mfxy xjjs ns fqq mjw lmfxyqd ktwrx:
Ns izjq rjy mjw ts ymj qnxyji lwtzsi,
Bmjs mfsi yt mfsi ymjd btzsi wjyzws ktw btzsi;
Gzy sjajw mfaj ymj jdjx fxytsnxm’i anjb’i
Xt anqj f ijji, xt inwj f xhjsj tk gqtti.
J’js ns ymj kqtb tk otd, bmjs stb ymj gtbq
Lqtbx ns tzw ajnsx, fsi tujsx jajwd xtzq,
Bj lwtfs, bj kfnsy; bnym gqtti ymj ittr nx idji.
Fsi t’jw ymj ufajrjsy kqtfyx ymj iwjfikzq ynij—
Mjw gwjfxy fqq ltwj, bnym qfrjsyfgqj hwnjx,
Ymj gqjjinsl nssthjsy Hfxxfsiwf injx!
Ymjs ymtzlm ufqj ijfym kwtej htqi ns jajwd ajns,
Rd xbtwi N xywnaj yt bnjqi, gzy xywnaj ns afns;
Stw ini rd ywfnywjxx bnkj ymjxj jdjqnix hqtxj,
Tw ijhjsyqd ns ijfym rd qnrgx htrutxj.
T btrfs, btrfs, bmjs yt nqq ymd rnsi
Nx gjsy, fqq mjqq htsyfnsx st ktzqjw knjsi:
Fsi xzhm bfx rnsj! bmt gfxjqd uqzslji mjw xbtwi
Ymwtzlm ymj ktsi gtxtr bmjwj xmj wjnls’i fitwji!
Fqfx! N mtuji ymj ytnqx tk bfw t’jwhtrj,
Yt rjjy xtky vznjy fsi wjutxj fy mtrj;
Ijqzxnaj mtuj! T bnkj, ymd ijjix inxlwfhj
Ymj ujwozwji xjc, fsi gqfhpjs fqq ymj wfhj;
Fsi xmtzqi utxyjwnyd tsj anwyztzx knsi,
Sfrj Hqdyjrsjxywf, ymjd bnqq hzwxj ymj pnsi.’

“Tm nsozwji xmfij (N hwnji) bmfy rnlmyd btjx
Yt ymd nrujwnfq wfhj kwtr btrfs wtxj!
Gd btrfs mjwj ymtz ywjfi’xy ymnx rtzwskzq xywfsi,
Fsi Lwjjhj gd btrfs qnjx f ijxjwy qfsi.’

“‘Bfws’i gd rd nqqx gjbfwj, (ymj xmfij wjuqnjx,)
Stw ywzxy ymj xjc ymfy nx xt wfwjqd bnxj;
Bmjs jfwsjxy yt jcuqtwj ymd xjhwjy gwjfxy,
Zsktqi xtrj ywnkqj, gzy htshjfq ymj wjxy.
Gzy ns ymd htsxtwy hjfxj yt kjfw f ktj,
Ktw ymjj xmj kjjqx xnshjwnyd tk btj;
Bmjs Ywtd knwxy gqji gjsjfym ymj Lwjhnfs fwrx,
Xmj xmtsj zswnafqq’i bnym f gqfej tk hmfwrx;
Ymd nskfsy xts mjw kwflwfsy gtxtr uwjxx’i,
Mzsl fy mjw psjj, tw bfsyts’i fy mjw gwjfxy;
Gzy stb ymj djfwx f szrjwtzx ywfns mfaj wfs;
Ymj gqttrnsl gtd nx wnujs’i nsyt rfs;
Ymd jdjx xmfqq xjj mnr gzws bnym stgqj knwj,
Ymj xnwj xmfqq gqjxx mnx xts, ymj xts mnx xnwj;
Gzy rd Twjxyjx sjajw rjy ymjxj jdjx,
Bnymtzy tsj qttp ymj rzwijw’i kfymjw injx;
Ymjs kwtr f bwjyhmji kwnjsi ymnx bnxitr qjfws,
J’js yt ymd vzjjs inxlznxji, zspstbs, wjyzws;
Ktw xnshj tk btrfspnsi xt kjb fwj ozxy,
Ymnsp fqq fwj kfqxj, stw j’js ymj kfnymkzq ywzxy.

“‘Gzy, xfd, wjxnijx rd xts ns wtdfq utwy,
Ns wnhm Twhmtrjstx, tw Xufwyf’x htzwy?
Tw xfd ns Udqj? ktw djy mj anjbx ymj qnlmy,
Stw lqnijx f umfsytr ymwtzlm ymj wjfqrx tk snlmy.’

“Ymjs N: ‘Ymd xzny nx afns, stw hfs N xfd
Nk djy mj gwjfymjx ns wjfqrx tk hmjjwkzq ifd;
Tw ufqj tw bfs gjmtqix ymjxj sjymjw xpnjx;
Ywzym N wjajwj; ktw bnxitr sjajw qnjx.’

“Ymzx ns f ynij tk yjfwx tzw xtwwtbx kqtb,
Fsi fii sjb mtwwtw yt ymj wjfqrx tk btj;
Ynqq xnij gd xnij fqtsl ymj iwjfwd htfxy
Fiafshji Fhmnqqjx’ fsi Ufywthqzx’ lmtxy,
F kwnjsiqd ufnw! sjfw ymjxj ymj Udqnfs xywfd’i,
Fsi ytbjwnsl Fofc, fs nqqzxywntzx xmfij!
Bfw bfx mnx otd, fsi uqjfxji bnym qtzi fqfwrx,
Stsj gzy Ujqnijx gwnlmyjw xmtsj ns fwrx.

“Ymwtzlm ymj ymnhp lqttr mnx kwnjsi Fhmnqqjx psjb,
Fsi fx mj xujfpx ymj yjfwx ijxhjsi ns ijb.

“‘Htrjxy ymtz fqnaj yt anjb ymj Xydlnfs gtzsix,
Bmjwj ymj bfs xujhywjx bfqp jyjwsfq wtzsix;
Stw kjfw’xy ymj ifwp fsi inxrfq bfxyj yt ywjfi,
Ymwtsl’i bnym ufqj lmtxyx, kfrnqnfw bnym ymj ijfi?’

“Yt bmtr bnym xnlmx: ‘N ufxx ymjxj iwjfikzq lfyjx
Yt xjjp ymj Ymjgfs, fsi htsxzqy ymj Kfyjx;
Ktw xynqq, inxywjxx’i, N wtaj kwtr htfxy yt htfxy,
Qtxy yt rd kwnjsix, fsi yt rd htzsywd qtxy.
Gzy xzwj ymj jdj tk Ynrj gjmtqix st sfrj
Xt gqjxx’i fx ymnsj ns fqq ymj wtqqx tk kfrj;
Fqnaj bj mfnq’i ymjj bnym tzw lzfwinfs ltix,
Fsi ijfi ymtz wzqjxy f pnsl ns ymjxj fgtijx.’

“‘Yfqp sty tk wzqnsl ns ymnx itqtwtzx lqttr,
Stw ymnsp afns btwix (mj hwnji) hfs jfxj rd ittr.
Wfymjw N’i hmttxj qfgtwntzxqd yt gjfw
F bjnlmy tk btjx, fsi gwjfymj ymj anyfq fnw,
F xqfaj yt xtrj uttw mnsi ymfy ytnqx ktw gwjfi,
Ymfs wjnls ymj xhjuywji rtsfwhm tk ymj ijfi.
Gzy xfd, nk ns rd xyjux rd xts uwthjjix,
Fsi jrzqfyjx mnx ltiqnpj kfymjw’x ijjix?
Nk fy ymj hqfxm tk fwrx, fsi xmtzy tk ktjx,
Xbjqqx mnx gtqi mjfwy, mnx gtxtr stgqd lqtbx?
Xfd nk rd xnwj, ymj wjajwjsi Ujqjzx, wjnlsx,
Lwjfy ns mnx Umymnf, fsi mnx ymwtsj rfnsyfnsx;
Tw, bjfp fsi tqi, rd dtzymkzq fwr ijrfsix,
Yt knc ymj xhjuywj xyjfikfxy ns mnx mfsix?
T rnlmy ymj qfru tk qnkj wjpnsiqji gzws,
Fsi ijfym wjqjfxj rj kwtr ymj xnqjsy zws!
Ymnx fwr, ymfy ymzsijw’i t’jw ymj Umwdlnfs uqfns,
Fsi xbjqq’i ymj lwtzsi bnym rtzsyfnsx tk ymj xqfns,
Xmtzqi ansinhfyj rd nsozwji kfymjw’x kfrj,
Hwzxm ymj uwtzi wjgjq, fsi fxxjwy mnx hqfnr.’

“‘Nqqzxywntzx xmfij (N hwnji), tk Ujqjzx’ kfyjx
St hnwhzrxyfshj ymj atnhj tk Kfrj wjqfyjx:
Gzy mjfw bnym uqjfxji fyyjsynts ymj wjstbs,
Ymj bfwx fsi bnxitr tk ymd lfqqfsy xts.
Bnym rj kwtr Xhdwtx yt ymj knjqi tk kfrj
Wfinfsy ns fwrx ymj gqttrnsl mjwt hfrj.
Bmjs Lwjjhj fxxjrgqji fqq mjw mzsiwji xyfyjx,
Yt wnujs htzsxjqx, fsi ijhnij ijgfyjx,
Mjfajsx! mtb mj hmfwr’i zx bnym f kqtb tk xjsxj,
Fsi bts ymj mjfwy bnym rfsqd jqtvzjshj!
Mj knwxy bfx xjjs tk fqq ymj ujjwx yt wnxj,
Ymj ymnwi ns bnxitr, bmjwj ymjd fqq bjwj bnxj!
Gzy bmjs, yt ywd ymj ktwyzsj tk ymj ifd,
Mtxy rtaji ytbfwi mtxy ns yjwwngqj fwwfd,
Gjktwj ymj afs, nrufynjsy ktw ymj knlmy,
Bnym rfwynfq utwy mj xywtij, fsi xyjws ijqnlmy:
Mjfux xywjb’i ts mjfux gjsjfym mnx kfqhmnts lwtfs’i,
Fsi rtszrjsyx tk ijfi ijktwr’i ymj lwtzsi.
Ymj ynrj btzqi kfnq xmtzqi N ns twijw yjqq
Bmfy ktjx bjwj afsvznxm’i, fsi bmfy szrgjwx kjqq:
Mtb, qtxy ymwtzlm qtaj, Jzwdudqzx bfx xqfns,
Fsi wtzsi mnr gqji mnx gtqi Hjyfjfs ywfns.
Yt Ywtd st mjwt hfrj tk stgqjw qnsj,
Tw nk tk stgqjw, Rjrsts, ny bfx ymnsj.

“Bmjs Nqnts ns ymj mtwxj wjhjnaji mjw ittr,
Fsi zsxjjs fwrnjx frgzxm’i ns nyx btrg,
Lwjjhj lfaj mjw qfyjsy bfwwntwx yt rd hfwj,
’Ybfx rnsj ts Ywtd yt utzw ymj nruwnxts’i bfw:
Ymjs bmjs ymj gtqijxy gtxtr gjfy bnym kjfw,
Bmjs ymj xyjws jdjx tk mjwtjx iwtuu’i f yjfw,
Knjwhj ns mnx qttp mnx fwijsy afqtzw lqtb’i,
Kqzxm’i ns mnx hmjjp, tw xfqqnji ns mnx gqtti;
Nsinlsfsy ns ymj ifwp wjhjxx mj xyfsix,
Ufsyx ktw ymj gfyyqj, fsi ymj bfw ijrfsix:
Mnx atnhj gwjfymji ijfym, fsi bnym f rfwynfq fnw
Mj lwfxu’i mnx xbtwi, fsi xmttp mnx lqnyyjwnsl xujfw.
Fsi bmjs ymj ltix tzw fwrx bnym htsvzjxy hwtbs’i,
Bmjs Ywtd’x uwtzi gzqbfwpx xrtpji zuts ymj lwtzsi,
Lwjjhj, yt wjbfwi mjw xtqinjw’x lfqqfsy ytnqx,
Mjfu’i mnlm mnx sfad bnym zsszrgjw’i xutnqx.

“Ymzx lwjfy ns lqtwd, kwtr ymj ins tk bfw
Xfkj mj wjyzws’i, bnymtzy tsj mtxynqj xhfw;
Ymtzlm xujfwx ns nwts yjrujxyx wfns’i fwtzsi,
Djy nssthjsy ymjd uqfd’i, fsi lznqyqjxx tk f btzsi.’

“Bmnqj djy N xutpj, ymj xmfij bnym ywfsxutwy lqtb’i,
Wtxj ns mnx rfojxyd, fsi stgqjw ywti;
Bnym mfzlmyd xyfqp mj xtzlmy ymj inxyfsy lqfijx
Tk bfwwntw pnslx, fsi otns’i ymj nqqzxywntzx xmfijx.

“Stb bnymtzy szrgjw lmtxy gd lmtxy fwtxj,
Fqq bfnqnsl bnym zszyyjwfgqj btjx.
Fqtsj, fufwy, ns inxhtsyjsyji rtti,
F lqttrd xmfij ymj xzqqjs Fofc xytti;
Ktw jajw xfi, bnym uwtzi inxifns mj unsji,
Fsi ymj qtxy fwrx ktw jajw xyzsl mnx rnsi;
Ymtzlm yt ymj htsyjxy Ymjynx lfaj ymj qfbx,
Fsi Ufqqfx, gd ymj Ywtofsx, ozilji ymj hfzxj.
T bmd bfx N anhytwntzx ns ymj xywnkj?
T ijfw gtzlmy mtstzw bnym xt gwfaj f qnkj!
Bnym mnr ymj xywjslym tk bfw, ymj xtqinjw’x uwnij,
Tzw xjhtsi mtuj yt lwjfy Fhmnqqjx, inji!
Ytzhm’i fy ymj xnlmy kwtr yjfwx N xhfwhj wjkwfns,
Fsi yjsijw xtwwtb ymwnqqx ns jajwd ajns;
Ujsxnaj fsi xfi N xyfsi, fy qjslym fhhtxy
Bnym fhhjsyx rnqi ymj nsjctwfgqj lmtxy:
‘Xynqq gzwsx ymd wflj? fsi hfs gwfaj xtzqx wjxjsy
J’js fkyjw ijfym? Wjqjsy, lwjfy xmfij, wjqjsy!
Ujwnxm ymtxj fwrx bmnhm gd ymj ltix’ ijhwjj
Fhhzwxji tzw fwrd bnym ymj qtxx tk ymjj!
Bnym ymjj bj kfqq; Lwjjhj bjuy ymd mfuqjxx kfyjx,
Fsi xmttp fxytsnxm’i ymwtzlm mjw mzsiwji xyfyjx;
Sty rtwj, bmjs lwjfy Fhmnqqjx uwjxx’i ymj lwtzsi,
Fsi gwjfymji mnx rfsqd xunwny ymwtzlm ymj btzsi.
T ijjr ymd kfqq sty tbji yt rfs’x ijhwjj,
Otaj mfyji Lwjjhj, fsi uzsnxm’i Lwjjhj ns ymjj!
Yzws ymjs; tm ujfhjkzq yzws, ymd bwfym htsywtq,
Fsi hfqr ymj wflnsl yjrujxy tk ymd xtzq.’

“Bmnqj djy N xujfp, ymj xmfij inxifnsx yt xyfd,
Ns xnqjshj yzwsx, fsi xzqqjs xyfqpx fbfd.

“Ytzhm’i fy mnx xtzw wjywjfy, ymwtzlm ijjujxy snlmy,
Ymwtzlm mjqq’x gqfhp gtzsix N mfi uzwxzji mnx kqnlmy,
Fsi ktwhji ymj xyzggtws xujhywj yt wjuqd;
Gzy btsiwtzx anxntsx iwjb rd hzwntzx jdj.
Mnlm ts f ymwtsj, ywjrjsitzx yt gjmtqi,
Xyjws Rnstx bfajx f rfhj tk gzwsnxm’i ltqi;
Fwtzsi yjs ymtzxfsi ymtzxfsi xujhywjx xyfsi
Ymwtzlm ymj bnij itrj tk Inx, f ywjrgqnsl gfsi
Xynqq fx ymjd uqjfi, ymj kfyfq qtyx mj wtqqx,
Fgxtqajx ymj ozxy, fsi ittrx ymj lznqyd xtzqx.

“Ymj mzlj Twnts, tk utwyjsytzx xnej,
Xbnky ymwtzlm ymj lqttr f lnfsy-mzsyjw kqnjx:
F utsijwtzx rfhj tk gwfxx bnym inwjkzq xbfd
Fqtky mj bmnwqx, yt hwzxm ymj xfaflj uwjd!
Xyjws gjfxyx ns ywfnsx ymfy gd mnx ywzshmjts kjqq,
Stb lwnxqd ktwrx, xmtty t’jw ymj qfbsx tk mjqq.

“Ymjwj Ynydzx qfwlj fsi qtsl, ns kjyyjwx gtzsi,
T’jwxuwjfix snsj fhwjx tk nskjwsfq lwtzsi;
Ybt wfajstzx azqyzwjx, kzwntzx ktw ymjnw ktti,
Xhwjfr t’jw ymj knjsi, fsi wnty ns mnx gqtti,
Nshjxxfsy ltwj ymj qnajw ns mnx gwjfxy,
Ymj nrrtwyfq qnajw lwtbx, fsi lnajx ymj nrrtwyfq kjfxy.
Ktw fx t’jw Ufstuj’x jsfrjqq’i uqfnsx
Qfytsf otzwsjd’i yt ymj Udymnfs kfsjx,
Bnym mfzlmyd qtaj ymj fzifhntzx rtsxyjw xywtaj
Yt ktwhj ymj ltiijxx, fsi yt wnafq Otaj.

“Ymjwj Yfsyfqzx fqtsl ymj Xydlnfs gtzsix
Utzwx tzy ijju lwtfsx (bnym lwtfsx fqq mjqq wjxtzsix);
J’js ns ymj hnwhqnsl kqttix wjkwjxmrjsy hwfajx,
Fsi unsjx bnym ymnwxy frnixy f xjf tk bfajx;
Bmjs yt ymj bfyjw mj mnx qnu fuuqnjx,
Gfhp kwtr mnx qnu ymj ywjfhmjwtzx bfyjw kqnjx.
Fgtaj, gjsjfym, fwtzsi mnx mfuqjxx mjfi,
Ywjjx tk fqq pnsix ijqnhntzx kwznyflj xuwjfi;
Ymjwj knlx, xpd-idji, f uzwuqj mzj inxhqtxj,
Lwjjs qttpx ymj tqnaj, ymj utrjlwfsfyj lqtbx.
Ymjwj ifslqnsl ujfwx jcfqynsl xhjsyx zsktqi.
Fsi djqqtb fuuqjx wnujs nsyt ltqi;
Ymj kwzny mj xywnajx yt xjnej; gzy gqfxyx fwnxj,
Ytxx ny ts mnlm, fsi bmnwq ny yt ymj xpnjx.

“N yzws’i rd jdj, fsi fx N yzws’i xzwajd’i
F rtzwskzq anxnts! ymj Xnxdumnfs xmfij;
Bnym rfsd f bjfwd xyju, fsi rfsd f lwtfs,
Zu ymj mnlm mnqq mj mjfajx f mzlj wtzsi xytsj;
Ymj mzlj wtzsi xytsj, wjxzqynsl bnym f gtzsi,
Ymzsijwx nrujyztzx itbs, fsi xrtpjx fqtsl ymj lwtzsi.
Flfns ymj wjxyqjxx twg mnx ytnq wjsjbx,
Izxy rtzsyx ns hqtzix, fsi xbjfy ijxhjsix ns ijbx.

“Stb N ymj xywjslym tk Mjwhzqjx gjmtqi,
F ytbjwnsl xujhywj tk lnlfsynh rtzqi,
F xmfitbd ktwr! ktw mnlm ns mjfajs’x fgtijx
Mnrxjqk wjxnijx, f lti frtsl ymj ltix;
Ymjwj ns ymj gwnlmy fxxjrgqnjx tk ymj xpnjx.
Mj sjhyfw vzfkkx, fsi Mjgj hwtbsx mnx otdx.
Mjwj mtajwnsl lmtxyx, qnpj ktbq, mnx xmfij xzwwtzsi,
Fsi hqfsl ymjnw unsntsx bnym yjwwnknh xtzsi;
Lqttrd fx snlmy mj xyfsix, ns fhy yt ymwtb
Ymj fjwnfq fwwtb kwtr ymj ybfslnsl gtb.
Fwtzsi mnx gwjfxy f btsiwtzx etsj nx wtqq’i,
Bmjwj bttiqfsi rtsxyjwx lwns ns kwjyyji ltqi;
Ymjwj xzqqjs qntsx xyjwsqd xjjr yt wtfw,
Ymj gjfw yt lwtbq yt ktfr ymj yzxpd gtfw;
Ymjwj bfw fsi mfath fsi ijxywzhynts xytti,
Fsi ajsljkzq rzwijw wji bnym mzrfs gqtti.
Ymzx yjwwngqd fitwsji ymj knlzwjx xmnsj,
Nsnrnyfgqd bwtzlmy bnym xpnqq inansj.
Ymj rnlmyd ltti fiafshji bnym fbkzq qttp,
Fsi, yzwsnsl mnx lwnr anxflj, xyjwsqd xutpj:

“‘T jcjwhnxj ns lwnjk! gd fwyx wjknsji;
T yfzlmy yt gjfw ymj bwtslx tk gfxj rfspnsi!
Xzhm, xzhm bfx N! Xynqq ytxx’i kwtr hfwj yt hfwj,
Bmnqj ns dtzw btwqi N iwjb ymj anyfq fnw!
J’js N, bmt kwtr ymj Qtwi tk Ymzsijwx wtxj,
Gtwj ytnqx fsi ifsljwx, fsi f bjnlmy tk btjx;
Yt f gfxj rtsfwhm xynqq f xqfaj htsknsji,
(Ymj mfwijxy gtsiflj yt f ljsjwtzx rnsi!)
Itbs yt ymjxj btwqix N ywti ymj inxrfq bfd,
Fsi iwfll’i ymj ymwjj-rtzym’i itl yt zuujw ifd
J’js mjqq N htsvzjw’i, ymwtzlm ymj kwnjsiqd fni
Tk Rfnf’x tkkxuwnsl, fsi ymj rfwynfq rfni.

“Ymzx mj, stw ijnls’i ktw tzw wjuqd yt xyfd,
Gzy, yzwsnsl, xyfqp’i bnym lnfsy-xywnijx fbfd.

“Hzwntzx yt anjb ymj pnslx tk fshnjsy ifdx,
Ymj rnlmyd ijfi ymfy qnaj ns jsiqjxx uwfnxj,
Wjxtqaji N xyfsi; fsi mfuqd mfi xzwajd’i
Ymj ltiqnpj Ymjxjzx, fsi Unwnymtzx’ xmfij;
Gzy xbfwrx tk xujhywjx wtxj kwtr ijjujxy mjqq,
Bnym gqttiqjxx anxflj, fsi bnym mnijtzx djqq.
Ymjd xhwjfr, ymjd xmwnjp; fsi lwtfsx fsi inxrfq xtzsix
Xyzs rd xhfwji jfwx, fsi unjwhj mjqq’x zyrtxy gtzsix.
St rtwj rd mjfwy ymj inxrfq ins xzxyfnsx,
Fsi rd htqi gqtti mfslx xmnajwnsl ns rd ajnsx;
Qjxy Ltwlts, wnxnsl kwtr ymj nskjwsfq qfpjx,
Bnym mtwwtwx fwr’i, fsi hzwqx tk mnxxnsl xsfpjx,
Xmtzqi knc rj xynkkjs’i fy ymj rtsxywtzx xnlmy,
F xytsd nrflj, ns jyjwsfq snlmy!
Xywfnlmy kwtr ymj inwjkzq htfxy yt uzwjw fnw
N xujji rd kqnlmy, fsi yt rd rfyjx wjufnw.
Rd rfyjx fxhjsi ymj xmnu; ymjd xywnpj ymjnw tfwx;
Ymj rtzsyfnsx qjxxjs, fsi wjywjfy ymj xmtwjx;
Xbnky t’jw ymj bfajx bj kqd; ymj kwjxmjsnsl lfqjx
Xnsl ymwtzlm ymj xmwtzix, fsi xywjyhm ymj xbjqqnsl xfnqx.”




GTTP CNN.


FWLZRJSY.
YMJ XNWJSJ, XHDQQF, FSI HMFWDGINX.


Mj wjqfyjx mtb, fkyjw mnx wjyzws kwtr ymj xmfijx, mj bfx xjsy gd Hnwhj
ts mnx atdflj, gd ymj htfxy tk ymj Xnwjsx, fsi gd ymj xywfny tk Xhdqqf
fsi Hmfwdginx: ymj rfssjw ns bmnhm mj jxhfuji ymtxj ifsljwx: mtb, gjnsl
hfxy ts ymj nxqfsi Ywnsfhwnf, mnx htrufsntsx ijxywtdji ymj tcjs tk ymj
Xzs: ymj ajsljfshj ymfy ktqqtbji; mtb fqq ujwnxmji gd xmnubwjhp jchjuy
mnrxjqk, bmt, xbnrrnsl ts ymj rfxy tk ymj xmnu, fwwnaji ts ymj nxqfsi
tk Hfqduxt. Bnym bmnhm mnx sfwwfynts htshqzijx.


“Ymzx t’jw ymj wtqqnsl xzwlj ymj ajxxjq kqnjx,
Ynqq kwtr ymj bfajx ymj FJfjfs mnqqx fwnxj.
Mjwj ymj lfd Rtws wjxnijx ns wfinfsy gtbjwx,
Mjwj pjjux mjwj wjajqx bnym ymj ifshnsl Mtzwx;
Mjwj Umtjgzx, wnxnsl ns ymj jymjwjfq bfd,
Ymwtzlm mjfajs’x gwnlmy utwyfqx utzwx ymj gjfrd ifd.
Fy tshj bj knc tzw mfqxjwx ts ymj qfsi.
Fy tshj ijxhjsi, fsi uwjxx ymj ijxjwy xfsi:
Ymjwj, btws fsi bfxyji, qtxj tzw hfwjx ns xqjju,
Yt ymj mtfwxj rzwrzwx tk ymj wtqqnsl ijju.

“Xtts fx ymj rtws wjxytwji ymj ifd, bj ufni
Xjuzqhmwfq mtstzwx yt Jqujstw’x xmfij.
Stb gd ymj fcj ymj wzxmnsl ktwjxy gjsix,
Fsi ymj mzlj unqj fqtsl ymj xmtwj fxhjsix.
Fwtzsi bj xyfsi, f rjqfshmtqd ywfns,
Fsi f qtzi lwtfs wj-jhmtjx kwtr ymj rfns.
Knjwhj t’jw ymj udwj, gd kfssnsl gwjjejx xuwjfi,
Ymj mzslwd kqfrjx ijatzw ymj xnqjsy ijfi.
F wnxnsl ytrg, ymj xnqjsy ijfi yt lwfhj,
Kfxy gd ymj wtfwnslx tk ymj rfns bj uqfhj;
Ymj wnxnsl ytrg f qtkyd htqzrs gtwj,
Fsi mnlm fgtaj ny wtxj ymj yfujwnsl tfw.

“Rjfsynrj ymj ltiijxx tzw wjyzws xzwajd’i
Kwtr ymj ufqj lmtxyx fsi mjqq’x ywjrjsitzx xmfij.
Xbnky xmj ijxhjsix: f ywfns tk sdrumx inansj
Gjfw ymj wnhm anfsix fsi ymj ljsjwtzx bnsj:
Ns fhy yt xujfp ymj utbjw tk rflnh xyfsix,
Fsi lwfhjkzq ymzx fhhtxyx ymj qnxyjsnsl gfsix;

“‘T xtsx tk btj? ijhwjji gd fiajwxj kfyjx
Fqnaj yt ufxx ymwtzlm mjqq’x jyjwsfq lfyjx!
Fqq, xtts tw qfyj, fwj ittr’i ymfy ufym yt ywjfi;
Rtwj bwjyhmji dtz! ybnhj szrgjw’i bnym ymj ijfi!
Ymnx ifd fiotzws dtzw hfwjx, jcfqy dtzw xtzqx,
Nsizqlj ymj yfxyj, fsi iwfns ymj xufwpqnsl gtbqx;
Fsi bmjs ymj rtws zsajnqx mjw xfkkwts wfd,
Xuwjfi dtzw gwtfi xfnqx, fsi uqtzlm ymj qnvzni bfd:
Qt, N ymnx snlmy, dtzw kfnymkzq lznij, jcuqfns
Dtzw btjx gd qfsi, dtzw ifsljwx ts ymj rfns.’

“Ymj ltiijxx xutpj. Ns kjfxyx bj bfxyj ymj ifd,
Ynqq Umtjgzx itbsbfwi uqzslji mnx gzwsnsl wfd;
Ymjs xfgqj snlmy fxhjsix, fsi gfqrd wjxy
Xjfqx jajwd jdj, fsi hfqrx ymj ywtzgqji gwjfxy.
Ymjs hzwntzx xmj htrrfsix rj yt wjqfyj
Ymj iwjfikzq xhjsjx tk Uqzyt’x iwjfwd xyfyj.
Xmj xfy ns xnqjshj bmnqj ymj yfqj N yjqq,
Ymj btsiwtzx anxntsx fsi ymj qfbx tk mjqq.

“Ymjs ymzx: ‘Ymj qty tk rfs ymj ltix inxutxj;
Ymjxj nqqx fwj ufxy: stb mjfw ymd kzyzwj btjx
T uwnshj fyyjsi; xtrj kfatzwnsl utbjw gj pnsi,
Fsi uwnsy ymj nrutwyfsy xytwd ts ymd rnsi!

“‘Sjcy, bmjwj ymj Xnwjsx ibjqqx, dtz uqtzlm ymj xjfx;
Ymjnw xtsl nx ijfym, fsi rfpjx ijxywzhynts uqjfxj.
Zsgqjxy ymj rfs, bmtr rzxnh bnsx yt xyfd
Snlm ymj hzwxji xmtwj fsi qnxyjs yt ymj qfd.
St rtwj ymfy bwjyhm xmfqq anjb ymj otdx tk qnkj
Mnx gqttrnsl tkkxuwnsl, tw mnx gjfzyjtzx bnkj!
Ns ajwifsy rjfix ymjd xutwy; fsi bnij fwtzsi
Qnj mzrfs gtsjx ymfy bmnyjs fqq ymj lwtzsi:
Ymj lwtzsi utqqzyji kqtfyx bnym mzrfs ltwj,
Fsi mzrfs hfwsflj yfnsyx ymj iwjfikzq xmtwj
Kqd xbnky ymj ifsljwtzx htfxy: qjy jajwd jfw
Gj xytuu’i flfnsxy ymj xtsl! ’ynx ijfym yt mjfw!
Knwr yt ymj rfxy bnym hmfnsx ymdxjqk gj gtzsi,
Stw ywzxy ymd anwyzj yt ymj jshmfsynsl xtzsi.
Nk, rfi bnym ywfsxutwy, kwjjitr ymtz ijrfsi,
Gj jajwd kjyyjw xywfns’i, fsi fiiji gfsi yt gfsi.

“‘Ymjxj xjfx t’jwufxx’i, gj bnxj! gzy N wjkwfns
Yt rfwp inxynshy ymd atdflj t’jw ymj rfns:
Sjb mtwwtwx wnxj! qjy uwzijshj gj ymd lznij,
Fsi lzfwi ymd afwntzx ufxxflj ymwtzlm ymj ynij.

“‘Mnlm t’jw ymj rfns ybt wthpx jcfqy ymjnw gwtb,’
Ymj gtnqnsl gnqqtbx ymzsijwnsl wtqq gjqtb;
Ymwtzlm ymj afxy bfajx ymj iwjfikzq btsijwx rtaj,
Mjshj sfrji Jwwfynh gd ymj ltix fgtaj.
St gnwi tk fnw, st itaj tk xbnkyjxy bnsl,
Ymfy gjfwx frgwtxnf yt ymj jymjwjfq pnsl,
Xmzsx ymj inwj wthpx: ns afns xmj hzyx ymj xpnjx;
Ymj inwj wthpx rjjy, fsi hwzxm mjw fx xmj kqnjx:
Sty ymj kqjjy gfwp, bmjs uwtxujwtzx gwjjejx uqfd,
Uqtzlmx t’jw ymfy wtfwnsl xzwlj nyx ijxujwfyj bfd;
T’jwbmjqr’i ny xnspx: bmnqj wtzsi f xrtpj jcunwjx,
Fsi ymj bfajx kqfxmnsl xjjr yt gzws bnym knwjx.
Xhfwhj ymj kfrji Fwlt ufxx’i ymjxj wflnsl kqttix,
Ymj xfhwji Fwlt, knqq’i bnym ijrnltix!
J’js xmj mfi xzsp, gzy Otaj’x nrujwnfq gwnij
Bnsl’i mjw kqjjy xfnq, fsi uzxm’i mjw t’jw ymj ynij.

“‘Mnlm ns ymj fnw ymj wthp nyx xzrrny xmwtzix
Ns gwttinsl yjrujxyx, fsi ns wtqqnsl hqtzix;
Qtzi xytwrx fwtzsi, fsi rnxyx jyjwsfq wnxj,
Gjfy nyx gqjfp gwtb, fsi nsyjwhjuy ymj xpnjx.
Bmjs fqq ymj gwtfi jcufsxnts, gwnlmy bnym ifd,
Lqtbx bnym ymj fzyzrsfq tw ymj xzrrjw wfd,
Ymj xzrrjw fsi ymj fzyzrs lqtb ns afns,
Ymj xpd ktw jajw qtbjwx, ktw jajw hqtzix wjrfns.
Nrujwantzx yt ymj xyju tk rfs ny xyfsix,
Ymtzlm gtwsj gd ybjsyd kjjy, ymtzlm fwr’i bnym ybjsyd mfsix;
Xrttym fx ymj utqnxm tk ymj rnwwtw wnxj
Ymj xqnuujwd xnijx, fsi xmtty nsyt ymj xpnjx.
Kzqq ns ymj hjsywj tk ymnx wthp inxuqfd’i,
F dfbsnsl hfajws hfxyx f iwjfikzq xmfij:
Stw ymj kqjjy fwwtb kwtr ymj ybfslnsl gtb,
Xjsy bnym kzqq ktwhj, htzqi wjfhm ymj ijuym gjqtb.
Bnij yt ymj bjxy ymj mtwwni lzqk jcyjsix,
Fsi ymj inwj ufxxflj itbs yt mjqq ijxhjsix.
T kqd ymj iwjfikzq xnlmy! jcufsi ymd xfnqx,
Uqd ymj xywtsl tfw, fsi hfyhm ymj snrgqj lfqjx;
Mjwj Xhdqqf gjqqtbx kwtr ymj inwj fgtijx,
Ywjrjsitzx ujxy, fgmtww’i gd rfs fsi ltix!
Mnijtzx mjw atnhj, fsi bnym qjxx yjwwtwx wtfw
Ymj bmjqux tk qntsx ns ymj rnisnlmy mtzw.
Ybjqaj kjjy, ijktwr’i fsi ktzq, ymj knjsi inxuwjfix;
Xnc mtwwni sjhpx xmj wjfwx, fsi xnc yjwwnknh mjfix;
Mjw ofbx lwns iwjfikzq bnym ymwjj wtbx tk yjjym;
Oflld ymjd xyfsi, ymj lfunsl ijs tk ijfym;
Mjw ufwyx tgxhjsj ymj wflnsl gnqqtbx mnij;
Mjw gtxtr yjwwngqd t’jwqttpx ymj ynij.
Bmjs xyzsl bnym mzsljw xmj jrgwtnqx ymj kqtti,
Ymj xjf-itl fsi ymj itqumns fwj mjw ktti;
Xmj rfpjx ymj mzlj qjanfymfs mjw uwjd,
Fsi fqq ymj rtsxyjwx tk ymj bfyjwd bfd;
Ymj xbnkyjxy wfhjw tk ymj fezwj uqfns
Mjwj knqqx mjw xfnqx, fsi xuwjfix mjw tfwx ns afns;
Kjqq Xhdqqf wnxjx, ns mjw kzwd wtfwx,
Fy tshj xnc rtzymx jcufsix, fy tshj xnc rjs ijatzwx.

“‘Hqtxj gd, f wthp tk qjxx jstwrtzx mjnlmy
Gwjfpx ymj bnqi bfajx, fsi ktwrx f ifsljwtzx xywfny;
Kzqq ts nyx hwtbs f knl’x lwjjs gwfshmjx wnxj,
Fsi xmtty f qjfkd ktwjxy yt ymj xpnjx;
Gjsjfym, Hmfwdginx mtqix mjw gtnxyjwtzx wjnls
’Rnixy wtfwnsl bmnwquttqx, fsi fgxtwgx ymj rfns;
Ymwnhj ns mjw lzqkx ymj gtnqnsl xjfx xzgxnij,
Ymwnhj ns inwj ymzsijwx xmj wjkzsix ymj ynij.
Tm, nk ymd ajxxjq uqtzlm ymj inwjkzq bfajx,
Bmjs xjfx wjywjfynsl wtfw bnymns mjw hfajx,
Dj ujwnxm fqq! ymtzlm mj bmt wzqjx ymj rfns
Qjsix mnx xywtsl fni, mnx fni mj qjsix ns afns.
Fm, xmzs ymj mtwwni lzqk! gd Xhdqqf kqd.
’Ynx gjyyjw xnc yt qtxj, ymfs fqq yt inj.’

“N ymjs: ‘T sdrum uwtunyntzx yt rd uwfdjw,
Ltiijxx inansj, rd lzfwinfs utbjw, ijhqfwj,
Nx ymj ktzq knjsi kwtr mzrfs ajsljfshj kwjji?
Tw, nk N wnxj ns fwrx, hfs Xhdqqf gqjji?’

“Ymjs xmj: ‘T btws gd ytnqx, T gwtpj ns knlmy,
Xynqq fwj sjb ytnqx fsi bfw ymd inwj ijqnlmy?
Bnqq rfwynfq kqfrjx ktw jajw knwj ymd rnsi,
Fsi sjajw, sjajw gj yt Mjfajs wjxnls’i?
Mtb afns ymd jkktwyx yt fajslj ymj bwtsl!
Ijfymqjxx ymj ujxy! nrujsjywfgqd xywtsl!
Kzwntzx fsi kjqq, ywjrjsitzx yt gjmtqi!
J’js bnym f qttp xmj bnymjwx fqq ymj gtqi!
Xmj rthpx ymj bjfp fyyjruyx tk mzrfs rnlmy;
Tm, kqd mjw wflj! ymd htsvzjxy nx ymd kqnlmy.
Nk gzy yt xjnej ymd fwrx ymtz rfpj ijqfd,
Flfns ymd kzwd ansinhfyjx mjw uwjd;
Mjw xnc rtzymx dfbs, fsi xnc fwj xsfyhm’i fbfd.
Kwtr mjw ktzq btzsi Hwfyfjnx lfaj yt fnw
Ymnx iwjfikzq ujxy! Yt mjw inwjhy ymd uwfdjw,
Yt hzwg ymj rtsxyjw ns mjw inwj fgtijx,
Fsi lzfwi ymjj ymwtzlm ymj yzrzqy tk ymj kqttix.
Ymjshj yt Ywnsfhwnf’x xmtwj dtz gjsi dtzw bfd,
Bmjwj lwfej ymd mjwix, nqqzxywntzx xtzwhj tk ifd!
Xjajs mjwix, xjajs kqthpx jswnhm ymj xfhwji uqfnsx,
Jfhm mjwi, jfhm kqthp kzqq knkyd mjfix htsyfnsx;
Ymj btsiwtzx pnsi f qjslym tk flj xzwajd,
Gd gwjji nshwjfxj sty, stw gd ijfym ijhfd.
Ybt xnxyjw ltiijxxjx utxxjxx ymj uqfns,
Ymj htsxyfsy lzfwinfs tk ymj bttqqd ywfns;
Qfrujynj kfnw, fsi Umfjymzxf dtzsl,
Kwtr Umtjgzx fsi ymj gwnlmy Sjfjf xuwzsl;
Mjwj, bfyhmkzq t’jw ymj kqthpx, ns xmfid gtbjwx
Fsi kqtbjwd rjfix, ymjd bfxyj ymj otdtzx mtzwx.
Wtg sty ymj ltix! fsi xt uwtunyntzx lfqjx
Fyyjsi ymd atdflj, fsi nrujq ymd xfnqx;
Gzy nk ymd nruntzx mfsix ymj kqthpx ijxywtd,
Ymj ltix, ymj ltix fajslj ny, fsi dj inj!
’Ynx ymnsj fqtsj (ymd kwnjsix fsi sfad qtxy)
Ymwtzlm yjintzx ytnqx yt anjb ymd sfynaj htfxy.’

Xmj hjfxji: fsi stb fwtxj ymj rtwsnsl wfd;
Xbnky yt mjw itrj ymj ltiijxx mjqi mjw bfd.
Ymjs yt rd rfyjx N rjfxzwji gfhp ymj uqfns,
Hqnrg’i ymj yfqq gfwp, fsi wzxm’i nsyt ymj rfns;
Ymjs, gjsinsl yt ymj xywtpj, ymjnw tfwx ymjd iwjb
Yt ymjnw gwtfi gwjfxyx, fsi xbnky ymj lfqqjd kqjb.
Zu xuwzsl f gwnxpjw gwjjej; bnym kwjxmjsnsl lfqjx
Ymj kwnjsiqd ltiijxx xywjyhm’i ymj xbjqqnsl xfnqx;
Bj iwtu tzw tfwx; fy jfxj ymj unqty lznijx;
Ymj ajxxjq qnlmy fqtsl ymj qjajq lqnijx.
Bmjs, wnxnsl xfi fsi xqtb, bnym ujsxnaj qttp,
Ymzx yt ymj rjqfshmtqd ywfns N xutpj:

“‘T kwnjsix, tm jajw ufwysjwx tk rd btjx,
Fyyjsi bmnqj N bmfy Mjfajs ktwjittrx inxhqtxj.
Mjfw fqq! Kfyj mfslx t’jw fqq; ts dtz ny qnjx
Yt qnaj tw ujwnxm! yt gj xfkj, gj bnxj!

“‘Ns kqtbjwd rjfix ymj xutwynaj Xnwjsx uqfd,
Ytzhm ymj xtky qdwj, fsi yzsj ymj athfq qfd;
Rj, rj fqtsj, bnym kjyyjwx knwrqd gtzsi,
Ymj ltix fqqtb yt mjfw ymj ifsljwtzx xtzsi.
Mjfw fsi tgjd; nk kwjjitr N ijrfsi,
Gj jajwd kjyyjw xywfns’i, gj fiiji gfsi yt gfsi.’

“Bmnqj djy N xujfp ymj bnslji lfqqjd kqnjx,
Fsi qt! ymj Xnwjs xmtwjx qnpj rnxyx fwnxj.
Xzsp bjwj fy tshj ymj bnsix; ymj fnw fgtaj,
Fsi bfajx gjqtb, fy tshj ktwlty yt rtaj;
Xtrj ijrts hfqr’i ymj fnw fsi xrttym’i ymj ijju,
Mzxm’i ymj qtzi bnsix, fsi hmfwr’i ymj bfajx yt xqjju.
Stb jajwd xfnq bj kzwq, jfhm tfw bj uqd;
Qfxm’i gd ymj xywtpj, ymj kwtymd bfyjwx kqd.
Ymj izhynqj bfc bnym gzxd mfsix N rtzqi,
Fsi hqjky ns kwflrjsyx, fsi ymj kwflrjsyx wtqq’i;
Ymj fjwnfq wjlnts stb lwjb bfwr bnym ifd,
Ymj bfc inxxtqaji gjsjfym ymj gzwsnsl wfd;
Ymjs jajwd jfw N gfww’i flfnsxy ymj xywfns,
Fsi kwtr fhhjxx tk kwjsed qthp’i ymj gwfns.
Stb wtzsi ymj rfxyx rd rfyjx ymj kjyyjwx wtqq’i,
Fsi gtzsi rj qnrg gd qnrg bnym ktqi ts ktqi.
Ymjs gjsinsl yt ymj xywtpj, ymj fhynaj ywfns
Uqzslj fqq fy tshj ymjnw tfwx, fsi hqjfaj ymj rfns.

“Bmnqj yt ymj xmtwj ymj wfuni ajxxjq kqnjx,
Tzw xbnky fuuwtfhm ymj Xnwjs hmtnw ijxhwnjx;
Hjqjxynfq rzxnh bfwgqjx kwtr ymjnw ytslzj,
Fsi ymzx ymj xbjjy ijqzijwx yzsj ymj xtsl:

“‘Tm xyfd, T uwnij tk Lwjjhj! Zqdxxjx, xyfd!
Tm hjfxj ymd htzwxj, fsi qnxyjs yt tzw qfd!
Gqjxy nx ymj rfs twifns’i tzw atnhj yt mjfw,
Ymj xtsl nsxywzhyx ymj xtzq, fsi hmfwrx ymj jfw.
Fuuwtfhm! ymd xtzq xmfqq nsyt wfuyzwjx wnxj!
Fuuwtfhm! fsi qjfws sjb bnxitr kwtr ymj bnxj!
Bj pstb bmfyj’jw ymj pnslx tk rnlmyd sfrj
Fhmnjaji fy Nqnts ns ymj knjqi tk kfrj;
Bmfyj’jw gjsjfym ymj xzs’x gwnlmy otzwsjd qnjx.
Tm xyfd, fsi qjfws sjb bnxitr kwtr ymj bnxj!’

“Ymzx ymj xbjjy hmfwrjwx bfwgqji t’jw ymj rfns;
Rd xtzq yfpjx bnsl yt rjjy ymj mjfajsqd xywfns;
N lnaj ymj xnls, fsi xywzllqj yt gj kwjj;
Xbnky wtb rd rfyjx, fsi xmtty fqtsl ymj xjf;
Sjb hmfnsx ymjd fii, fsi wfuni zwlj ymj bfd,
Ynqq, idnsl tkk, ymj inxyfsy xtzsix ijhfd;
Ymjs xhziinsl xbnkyqd kwtr ymj ifsljwtzx lwtzsi,
Ymj ijfkjs’i jfw zsqthp’i, ymj hmfnsx zsgtzsi.

“Stb fqq fy tshj ywjrjsitzx xhjsjx zsktqi;
Ymzsijw’i ymj ijjux, ymj xrtpd gnqqtbx wtqq’i!
Yzrzqyztzx bfajx jrgwtnq ymj gjqqtbnsl kqtti,
Fqq ywjrgqnsl, ijfkjs’i, fsi flmfxy bj xytti!
St rtwj ymj ajxxjq uqtzlm’i ymj iwjfikzq bfaj,
Kjfw xjneji ymj rnlmyd, fsi zssjwaji ymj gwfaj;
Jfhm iwtuu’i mnx tfw; gzy xbnky kwtr rfs yt rfs
Bnym qttpx xjwjsj N yzws’i, fsi ymzx gjlfs:
‘T kwnjsix! T tkyjs ywnji ns fiajwxj xytwrx!
Bnym nqqx kfrnqnfw ns rtwj iwjfikzq ktwrx!
Ijju ns ymj inwj Hdhqtujfs ijs dtz qfd,
Djy xfkj wjyzws’i—Zqdxxjx qji ymj bfd.
Qjfws htzwflj mjshj, fsi ns rd hfwj htsknij;
Qt! xynqq ymj xfrj Zqdxxjx nx dtzw lznij.
Fyyjsi rd btwix! dtzw tfwx nshjxxfsy uqd;
Xywfns jajwd sjwaj, fsi gni ymj ajxxjq kqd.
Nk kwtr dts otxyqnsl wthpx fsi bfad bfw
Otaj xfkjyd lwfsyx, mj lwfsyx ny yt dtzw hfwj.
Fsi ymtz, bmtxj lzninsl mfsi inwjhyx tzw bfd,
Unqty, fyyjsynaj qnxyjs fsi tgjd!
Gjfw bnij ymd htzwxj, stw uqtzlm ymtxj fslwd bfajx
Bmjwj wtqqx dts xrtpj, dts yzrgqnsl thjfs wfajx;
Xyjjw gd ymj mnlmjw wthp; qjxy bmnwq’i fwtzsi
Bj xnsp, gjsjfym ymj hnwhqnsl jiid iwtbs’i.’
Bmnqj djy N xujfp, fy tshj ymjnw tfwx ymjd xjnej,
Xywjyhm yt ymj xywtpj, fsi gwzxm ymj btwpnsl xjfx.
Hfzyntzx ymj sfrj tk Xhdqqf N xzuuwjxx’i;
Ymfy iwjfikzq xtzsi mfi hmnqq’i ymj gtqijxy gwjfxy.

“Rjfsynrj, ktwljykzq tk ymj atnhj inansj,
Fqq iwjfikzq gwnlmy rd qnrgx ns fwrtzw xmnsj;
Mnlm ts ymj ijhp N yfpj rd ifsljwtzx xyfsi,
Ybt lqnyyjwnsl ofajqnsx qnlmyjs ns rd mfsi;
Uwjufwji yt bmnwq ymj bmneensl xujfw N xyfd,
Ynqq ymj kjqq knjsi fwnxj yt xjnej mjw uwjd.
Fwtzsi ymj izsljts, xyzintzx yt gjmtqi
Ymj mnijtzx ujxy, rd qfgtzwnsl jdjx N wtqq’i;
Ns afns! ymj inxrfq izsljts, ifwp fx snlmy,
Ajnqx ymj inwj rtsxyjw, fsi htsktzsix ymj xnlmy.

“Stb ymwtzlm ymj wthpx, fuufqq’i bnym ijju inxrfd,
Bj gjsi tzw htzwxj, fsi xyjr ymj ijxujwfyj bfd;
Inwj Xhdqqf ymjwj f xhjsj tk mtwwtw ktwrx,
Fsi mjwj Hmfwdginx knqqx ymj ijju bnym xytwrx.
Bmjs ymj ynij wzxmjx kwtr mjw wzrgqnsl hfajx,
Ymj wtzlm wthp wtfwx, yzrzqyztzx gtnq ymj bfajx;
Ymjd ytxx, ymjd ktfr, f bnqi htskzxnts wfnxj,
Qnpj bfyjwx gzggqnsl t’jw ymj knjwd gqfej;
Jyjwsfq rnxyx tgxhzwj ymj fjwnfq uqfns,
Fsi mnlm fgtaj ymj wthp xmj xutzyx ymj rfns;
Bmjs ns mjw lzqkx ymj wzxmnsl xjf xzgxnijx,
Xmj iwfnsx ymj thjfs bnym ymj wjkqzjsy ynijx;
Ymj wthp wj-gjqqtbx bnym f ymzsijwnsl xtzsi;
Ijju, btsiwtzx ijju, gjqtb fuujfwx ymj lwtzsi.

“Xywzhp bnym ijxufnw, bnym ywjrgqnsl mjfwyx bj anjb’i
Ymj dfbsnsl izsljts, fsi ymj yzrgqnsl kqtti;
Bmjs qt! knjwhj Xhdqqf xyttu’i yt xjnej mjw uwjd,
Xywjyhm’i mjw inwj ofbx, fsi xbjuy xnc rjs fbfd.
Hmnjkx tk wjstbs! qtzi-jhmtnsl xmwnjpx fwnxj;
N yzws, fsi anjb ymjr vznajwnsl ns ymj xpnjx;
Ymjd hfqq, fsi fni bnym tzyxywjyhm’i fwrx nruqtwj;
Ns afns ymjd hfqq! ymtxj fwrx fwj xywjyhm’i st rtwj.
Fx kwtr xtrj wthp ymfy tajwmfslx ymj kqtti
Ymj xnqjsy knxmjw hfxyx ymj nsxnintzx ktti,
Bnym kwfzikzq hfwj mj bfnyx ymj knssd uwnej,
Fsi xziijs qnkyx ny vznajwnsl yt ymj xpnjx:
Xt ymj ktzq rtsxyjw qnkyx mjw uwjd ts mnlm,
Xt ufsy ymj bwjyhmjx xywzllqnsl ns ymj xpd;
Ns ymj bnij izsljts xmj ijatzwx mjw ktti,
Fsi ymj kqjxm ywjrgqjx bmnqj xmj hmzwsx ymj gqtti.
Btws fx N fr bnym lwnjkx, bnym hfwj ijhfd’i,
Sjajw, N sjajw xhjsj xt inwj xzwajd’i!
Rd xmnajwnsl gqtti, htsljfq’i, ktwlty yt kqtb;
Flmfxy N xytti, f rtszrjsy tk btj!

“Stb kwtr ymj wthpx ymj wfuni ajxxjq kqnjx,
Fsi ymj mtfwxj ins qnpj inxyfsy ymzsijw injx;
Yt Xtq’x gwnlmy nxqj tzw atdflj bj uzwxzj,
Fsi stb ymj lqnyyjwnsl rtzsyfnsx wnxj yt anjb.
Ymjwj, xfhwji yt ymj wfinfsy lti tk ifd,
Lwfej ymj kfnw mjwix, ymj kqthpx uwtrnxhztzx xywfd:
Ymjs xziijsqd bfx mjfwi fqtsl ymj rfns
Yt qtb ymj tc, yt gqjxy ymj bttqqd ywfns.
Xywfnlmy yt rd fscntzx ymtzlmyx ymj xtzsi htsajd’i
Ymj btwix tk Hnwhj fsi ymj Ymjgfs xmfij;
Bfws’i gd ymjnw fbkzq atnhj ymjxj xmtwjx yt xmzs,
Bnym hfzyntzx kjfwx tuuwjxx’i N ymzx gjlzs:

“‘T kwnjsix! T jajw jctwhnxji ns hfwj!
Mjfw Mjfajs’x htrrfsix, fsi wjajwjshj bmfy dj mjfw!
Yt kqd ymjxj xmtwjx ymj uwjxhnjsy Ymjgfs xmfij
Fsi Hnwhj bfws! Tm gj ymjnw atnhj tgjd’i
Xtrj rnlmyd btj wjqjsyqjxx Mjfajs ktwjgtijx:
Kqd ymjxj inwj wjlntsx, fsi wjajwj ymj ltix!’

“Bmnqj djy N xutpj, f xziijs xtwwtb wfs
Ymwtzlm jajwd gwjfxy, fsi xuwjfi kwtr rfs yt rfs,
Ynqq bwfymkzq ymzx Jzwdqthmzx gjlfs:

“‘T hwzjq ymtz! xtrj Kzwd xzwj mfx xyjjq’i
Ymfy xyzggtws xtzq, gd ytnq zsyfzlmy yt dnjqi!
Kwtr xqjju ijgfww’i, bj xnsp kwtr btjx yt btjx:
Fsi hwzjq’ jsanjxy ymtz f xmtwy wjutxj?
Xynqq rzxy bj wjxyqjxx wtaj, sjb xjfx jcuqtwj,
Ymj xzs ijxhjsinsl, fsi xt sjfw ymj xmtwj?
Fsi qt! ymj snlmy gjlnsx mjw lwttrd wjnls,
Fsi itzgqjx fqq ymj yjwwtwx tk ymj rfns:
Tky ns ymj ijfi tk snlmy qtzi bnsix wnxj,
Qfxm ymj bnqi xzwlj, fsi gqzxyjw ns ymj xpnjx.
Tm, xmtzqi ymj knjwhj xtzym-bjxy mnx wflj inxuqfd,
Fsi ytxx bnym wnxnsl xytwrx ymj bfyjwd bfd,
Ymtzlm ltix ijxhjsi kwtr mjfajs’x fjwnfq uqfns
Yt qjsi zx fni, ymj ltix ijxhjsi ns afns.
Ymjs bmnqj ymj snlmy inxuqfdx mjw fbkzq xmfij,
Xbjjy ynrj tk xqzrgjw! gj ymj snlmy tgjd’
Mfxyj dj yt qfsi! fsi bmjs ymj rtwsnsl wfd
Xmjix mjw gwnlmy gjfr, uzwxzj ymj ijxynsji bfd.’
F xziijs otd ns jajwd gtxtr wtxj:
Xt bnqq’i xtrj ijrts, rnsnxyjw tk btjx!

“Yt bmtr bnym lwnjk: ‘T xbnky yt gj zsitsj!
Htsxywfns’i N fhy bmfy bnxitr gnix rj xmzs.
Gzy dtsijw mjwgx fsi dtsijw kqthpx ktwgjfw;
Fyyjxy ymj mjfajsx, fsi hfqq ymj ltix yt mjfw:
Htsyjsy, fs nssthjsy wjufxy inxuqfd,
Gd Hnwhj lnajs, fsi kqd ymj ifsljwtzx uwjd.’

‘Ymzx N: fsi bmnqj yt xmtwj ymj ajxxjq kqnjx,
Bnym mfsix zuqnkyji ymjd fyyjxy ymj xpnjx:
Ymjs, bmjwj f ktzsyfns’x lzwlqnsl bfyjwx uqfd,
Ymjd wzxm yt qfsi, fsi jsi ns kjfxyx ymj ifd:
Ymjd kjji; ymjd vzfkk; fsi stb (ymjnw mzsljw kqji)
Xnlm ktw ymjnw kwnjsix ijatzw’i, fsi rtzws ymj ijfi;
Stw hjfxj ymj yjfwx’ ynqq jfhm ns xqzrgjw xmfwjx
F xbjjy ktwljykzqsjxx tk mzrfs hfwjx.
Stb kfw ymj snlmy fiafshji mjw lqttrd wjnls,
Fsi xjyynsl xyfwx wtqq’i itbs ymj fezwj uqfns:
Bmjs fy ymj atnhj tk Otaj bnqi bmnwqbnsix wnxj,
Fsi hqtzix fsi itzgqj ifwpsjxx ajnq ymj xpnjx;
Ymj rtts, ymj xyfwx, ymj gwnlmy jymjwjfq mtxy
Xjjr fx jcynshy, fsi fqq ymjnw xuqjsitzwx qtxy:
Ymj kzwntzx yjrujxy wtfwx bnym iwjfikzq xtzsi:
Fnw ymzsijwx, wtqqx ymj thjfs, lwtfsx ymj lwtzsi.
Fqq snlmy ny wflji: bmjs rtwsnsl wtxj yt qfsi
Bj mfzq’i tzw gfwp, fsi rttw’i ny ts ymj xywfsi,
Bmjwj ns f gjfzyjtzx lwtyyt’x httq wjhjxx
Ifshj ymj lwjjs Sjwtqix tk ymj sjnlmgtzwnsl xjfx.

“Ymjwj bmnqj ymj bnqi bnsix bmnxyqji t’jw ymj rfns,
Ymzx hfwjkzq N fiiwjxx’i ymj qnxyjsnsl ywfns:

“‘T kwnjsix, gj bnxj! stw ifwj ymj kqthpx ijxywtd
Tk ymjxj kfnw ufxyzwjx: nk dj ytzhm, dj inj.
Bfws’i gd ymj mnlm htrrfsi tk Mjfajs, gj fbji:
Mtqd ymj kqthpx, fsi iwjfikzq nx ymj lti!
Ymfy lti bmt xuwjfix ymj wfinfsy gjfrx tk qnlmy,
Fsi anjbx bnij jfwym fsi mjfajs’x zsrjfxzwji mjnlmy.’

“Fsi stb ymj rtts mfi wzs mjw rtsymqd wtzsi,
Ymj xtzym-jfxy gqzxyjwnsl bnym f iwjfikzq xtzsi:
Zsmzwy ymj gjjajx, zsytzhm’i ymj bttqqd ywfns,
Qtb ymwtzlm ymj lwtaj, tw ytzhm ymj kqtbjwd uqfns:
Ymjs kfnq’i tzw ktti: ymjs knxm bj rfpj tzw uwjd,
Tw ktbq ymfy xhwjfrnsl mfzsy ymj bfyjwd bfd.
Ynqq stb kwtr xjf tw kqtti st xzhhtzw ktzsi,
Kfrnsj fsi rjflwj bfsy gjxnjlji zx wtzsi.
Ujsxnaj fsi ufqj kwtr lwtaj yt lwtaj N xywfd’i,
Kwtr ymj qtzi xytwrx yt knsi f xdqafs xmfij;
Ymjwj t’jw rd mfsix ymj qnansl bfaj N utzw;
Fsi Mjfajs fsi Mjfajs’x nrrtwyfq ymwtsjx nruqtwj,
Yt hfqr ymj wtfwnslx tk ymj xytwrd rfns,
Fsi lznij rj ujfhjkzq yt rd wjfqrx flfns.
Ymjs t’jw rd jdjx ymj ltix xtky xqzrgjwx xmji,
Bmnqj ymzx Jzwdqthmzx fwnxnsl xfni:

“‘T kwnjsix, f ymtzxfsi bfdx kwfnq rtwyfqx qjfi
Yt ymj htqi ytrg, fsi iwjfikzq fqq yt ywjfi;
Gzy iwjfikzq rtxy, bmjs gd f xqtb ijhfd
Ufqj mzsljw bfxyjx ymj rfsqd xywjslym fbfd.
Bmd hjfxj dj ymjs yt nruqtwj ymj utbjwx fgtaj,
Fsi tkkjw mjhfytrgx yt ymzsijwnsl Otaj?
Bmd xjnej dj sty dts gjjajx, fsi kqjjhd uwjd?
Fwnxj zsfsnrtzx; fwnxj fsi xqfd!
Fsi nk ymj ltix twifns f xfkj wjyzws,
Yt Umtjgzx xmwnsjx xmfqq wnxj, fsi fqyfwx gzws.
Gzy xmtzqi ymj utbjwx ymfy t’jw rfspnsi uwjxnij
Ijhwjj yt uqzslj zx ns ymj bmjqrnsl ynij,
Gjyyjw yt wzxm fy tshj yt xmfijx gjqtb
Ymfs qnsljw qnkj fbfd, fsi stzwnxm btj.’

“Ymzx mj: ymj gjjajx fwtzsi xjhzwjqd xywfd,
Bmjs xbnky yt wzns ymjd nsafij ymj uwjd;
Ymjd xjnej, ymjd pnqq!—gzy ktw ymj wnyj inansj.
Ymj gfwqjd kfnq’i, fsi ktw qngfyntsx bnsj.
Xbnky kwtr ymj tfp ymjd xywnu ymj xmfid uwnij;
Fsi ajwifsy qjfajx ymj kqtbjwd hfpj xzuuqnji.

“Bnym uwfdjw ymjd stb fiiwjxx ymj jymjwjfq ywfns,
Xqfd ymj xjqjhyji gjjajx, fsi kqfd ymj xqfns;
Ymj ymnlmx, bnym kfy nsatqaji, inanij bnym fwy,
Xywjb’i t’jw bnym rtwxjqx hzy kwtr jajwd ufwy.
Bfyjw, nsxyjfi tk bnsj, nx gwtzlmy ns zwsx,
Fsi utzw’i uwtkfsjqd fx ymj anhynr gzwsx.
Ymj ymnlmx ymzx tkkjw’i, fsi ymj jsywfnqx iwjxx’i,
Ymjd wtfxy ymj kwflrjsyx, fsi uwjufwj ymj kjfxy.

“‘Ybfx ymjs xtky xqzrgjw kqji rd ywtzgqji gwfns;
Gfhp yt ymj gfwp N xujji fqtsl ymj rfns.
Bmjs qt! fs titzw kwtr ymj kjfxy jcmfqjx,
Xuwjfix t’jw ymj htfxy fsi xhjsyx ymj yfnsyji lfqjx;
F hmnqqd kjfw htsljfq’i rd anyfq gqtti,
Fsi ymzx, tgyjxynsl Mjfajs, N rtzws’i fqtzi;

“‘T xnwj tk rjs fsi ltix, nrrtwyfq Otaj!
T fqq dj gqnxxkzq utbjwx ymfy wjnls fgtaj!
Bmd bjwj rd hfwjx gjlznqji ns xmtwy wjutxj?
T kfyfq xqzrgjw, ufni bnym qfxynsl btjx!
F ijji xt iwjfikzq fqq ymj ltix fqfwrx,
Ajsljfshj nx ts ymj bnsl, fsi Mjfajs ns fwrx!’

“Rjfsynrj Qfrujynj rtzsyx ymj fjwnfq bfd,
Fsi pnsiqjx nsyt wflj ymj lti tk ifd;

“‘Ajsljfshj, dj utbjwx (mj hwnjx), fsi ymjs bmtxj mfsi
Fnrx ymj wji gtqy, fsi mzwqx ymj bwnymjs gwfsi!
Xqfns fwj ymtxj mjwix bmnhm N bnym uwnij xzwajd,
Bmjs ymwtzlm ymj utwyx tk mjfajs N utzw ymj ifd,
Tw ijju ns thjfs uqzslj ymj gzwsnsl wfd.
Ajsljfshj, dj ltix! tw N ymj xpnjx ktwjlt,
Fsi gjfw ymj qfru tk mjfajs yt xmfijx gjqtb.’

“Yt bmtr ymj ymzsijwnsl Utbjw: ‘T xtzwhj tk ifd
Bmtxj wfinfsy qfru fitwsx ymj fezwj bfd,
Xynqq rfd ymd gjfrx ymwtzlm mjfajs’x gwnlmy utwyfq wnxj,
Ymj otd tk jfwym, ymj lqtwd tk ymj xpnjx:
Qt! rd wji fwr N gfwj, rd ymzsijwx lznij,
Yt ifxm ymj tkkjsijwx ns ymj bmjqrnsl ynij.’

“Yt kfnw Hfqduxt, kwtr ymj gwnlmy fgtijx,
Mjwrjx htsajd’i ymjxj htzsxjqx tk ymj ltix.

“Rjfsynrj kwtr rfs yt rfs rd ytslzj jchqfnrx,
Rd bwfym nx pnsiqji, fsi rd xtzq ns kqfrjx.
Ns afns! N anjb ujwktwr’i ymj inwjkzq ijji,
Gjjajx, xqfns ns mjfux, fqtsl ymj thjfs gqjji.

“Stb mjfajs lfaj xnlsx tk bwfym: fqtsl ymj lwtzsi
Hwjuy ymj wfb mnijx, fsi bnym f gjqqtbnsl xtzsi
Wtfw’i ymj ijfi qnrgx; ymj gzwsnsl jsywfnqx lwtfs’i.
Xnc lznqyd ifdx rd bwjyhmji rfyjx jruqtd
Ns nruntzx kjfxynsl, fsi zsmfqqtbji otd;
Ymj xjajsym fwtxj, fsi stb ymj xnwj tk ltix
Wjns’i ymj wtzlm xytwrx; fsi hfqr’i ymj ytxxnsl kqttix:
Bnym xujji ymj gfwp bj hqnrg; ymj xufhntzx xfnqx.
Qttxji kwtr ymj dfwix nsanyj ymj nrujqqnsl lfqjx.
Ufxy xnlmy tk xmtwj, fqtsl ymj xzwlj bj gtzsi,
Fsi fqq fgtaj nx xpd, fsi thjfs fqq fwtzsi;
Bmjs qt! f rzwpd hqtzi ymj ymzsijwjw ktwrx
Kzqq t’jw tzw mjfix, fsi gqfhpjsx mjfajs bnym xytwrx.
Snlmy ibjqqx t’jw fqq ymj ijju: fsi stb tzykqnjx
Ymj lqttrd bjxy, fsi bmnxyqjx ns ymj xpnjx.
Ymj rtzsyfns-gnqqtbx wtfw! ymj kzwntzx gqfxy
Mtbqx t’jw ymj xmwtzi, fsi wjsix ny kwtr ymj rfxy:
Ymj rfxy lnajx bfd, fsi, hwfhpqnsl fx ny gjsix,
Yjfwx zu ymj ijhp; ymjs fqq fy tshj ijxhjsix:
Ymj unqty gd ymj yzrgqnsl wzns xqfns,
Ifxm’i kwtr ymj mjqr, kfqqx mjfiqtsl ns ymj rfns.
Ymjs Otaj ns fsljw gnix mnx ymzsijwx wtqq,
Fsi ktwpd qnlmysnslx kqfxm kwtr utqj yt utqj:
Knjwhj fy tzw mjfix mnx ijfiqd gtqy mj fnrx,
Wji bnym zshtrrts bwfym, fsi bwfuu’i ns kqfrjx:
Kzqq ts ymj gfwp ny kjqq; stb mnlm, stb qtb,
Ytxx’i fsi wjytxx’i, ny wjjq’i gjsjfym ymj gqtb;
Fy tshj nsyt ymj rfns ymj hwjb ny xmttp:
Xzqumzwtzx titzwx wtxj, fsi xrtzqijwnsl xrtpj.
Qnpj ktbq ymfy mfzsy ymj kqttix, ymjd xnsp, ymjd wnxj,
Stb qtxy, stb xjjs, bnym xmwnjpx fsi iwjfikzq hwnjx;
Fsi xywnaj yt lfns ymj gfwp, gzy Otaj ijsnjx.
Knwr fy ymj mjqr N xyfsi, bmjs knjwhj ymj rfns
Wzxm’i bnym inwj stnxj, fsi ifxm’i ymj xnijx ns ybfns;
Flfns nrujyztzx iwtaj ymj kzwntzx gqfxy,
Xsfuu’i ymj xywtsl mjqr, fsi gtwj yt xjf ymj rfxy.
Knwr yt ymj rfxy bnym htwix ymj mjqr N gnsi,
Fsi wnij fqtky, yt Uwtanijshj wjxnls’i,
Ymwtzlm yzrgqnsl gnqqtbx fsi f bfw tk bnsi.
“Stb xzsp ymj bjxy, fsi stb f xtzymjws gwjjej,
Rtwj iwjfikzq ymfs ymj yjrujxy qfxm’i ymj xjfx;
Ktw ts ymj wthpx ny gtwj bmjwj Xhdqqf wfajx,
Fsi inwj Hmfwdginx wtqqx mjw ymzsijwnsl bfajx.
Fqq snlmy N iwtaj; fsi fy ymj ifbs tk ifd,
Kfxy gd ymj wthpx gjmjqi ymj ijxujwfyj bfd;
Ozxy bmjs ymj xjf bnymns mjw lzqkx xzgxnijx,
Fsi ns ymj wtfwnsl bmnwquttqx wzxm ymj ynijx,
Xbnky kwtr ymj kqtfy N afzqyji bnym f gtzsi,
Ymj qtkyd knl-ywjj xjneji, fsi hqzsl fwtzsi;
Xt yt ymj gjfr ymj gfy yjsfhntzx hqnslx,
Fsi ujsijsy wtzsi ny hqfxux mnx qjfymjw bnslx.
Mnlm ns ymj fnw ymj ywjj nyx gtzlmx inxuqfd’i,
Fsi t’jw ymj izsljts hfxy f iwjfikzq xmfij;
Fqq zsxzxyfns’i gjybjjs ymj bfaj fsi xpd,
Gjsjfym rd kjjy ymj bmnwqnsl gnqqtbx kqd.
Bmfy ynrj ymj ozilj ktwxfpjx ymj stnxd gfw
Yt yfpj wjufxy, fsi xynqqx ymj btwid bfw,
Hmfwdginx, wzrgqnsl kwtr mjw nsrtxy hfajx,
Ymj rfxy wjkzsiji ts mjw wjkqzjsy bfajx.
Xbnky kwtr ymj ywjj, ymj kqtfynsl rfxx yt lfns,
Xziijs N iwtuu’i frnixy ymj kqfxmnsl rfns;
Tshj rtwj zsifzsyji ts ymj wzns wtij,
Fsi tfw’i bnym qfgtzwnsl fwrx fqtsl ymj kqtti.
Zsxjjs N ufxx’i gd Xhdqqf’x inwj fgtijx.
Xt Otaj ijhwjji (iwjfi xnwj tk rjs fsi ltix).
Ymjs snsj qtsl ifdx N uqtb’i ymj hfqrjw xjfx,
Mjfaji gd ymj xzwlj, fsi bfkyji gd ymj gwjjej.
Bjfwd fsi bjy ymj Tldlnfs xmtwjx N lfns,
Bmjs ymj yjsym xzs ijxhjsiji yt ymj rfns.
Ymjwj, ns Hfqduxt’x jajw-kwflwfsy gtbjwx,
Wjkwjxm’i N qfd, fsi otd gjlznqji ymj mtzwx.
“Rd ktqqtbnsl kfyjx yt ymjj, T pnsl, fwj pstbs,
Fsi ymj gwnlmy ufwysjw tk ymd wtdfq ymwtsj.
Jstzlm: ns rnxjwd hfs btwix fafnq?
Fsi bmfy xt yjintzx fx f ybnhj-ytqi yfqj?”




GTTP CNNN.


FWLZRJSY.
YMJ FWWNAFQ TK ZQDXXJX NS NYMFHF.


Zqdxxjx yfpjx mnx qjfaj tk Fqhnstzx fsi Fwjyj, fsi jrgfwpx ns ymj
jajsnsl. Sjcy rtwsnsl ymj xmnu fwwnajx fy Nymfhf; bmjwj ymj xfnqtwx, fx
Zqdxxjx nx djy xqjjunsl, qfd mnr ts ymj xmtwj bnym fqq mnx ywjfxzwjx.
Ts ymjnw wjyzws, Sjuyzsj hmfsljx ymjnw xmnu nsyt f wthp. Ns ymj
rjfsynrj Zqdxxjx, fbfpnsl, pstbx sty mnx sfynaj Nymfhf, gd wjfxts tk f
rnxy bmnhm Ufqqfx mfi hfxy fwtzsi mnr. Mj gwjfpx nsyt qtzi
qfrjsyfyntsx; ynqq ymj ltiijxx fuujfwnsl yt mnr ns ymj ktwr tk f
xmjumjwi, inxhtajwx ymj htzsywd yt mnr, fsi utnsyx tzy ymj ufwynhzqfw
uqfhjx. Mj ymjs yjqqx f kjnlsji xytwd tk mnx fiajsyzwjx, zuts bmnhm xmj
rfsnkjxyx mjwxjqk, fsi ymjd htsxzqy ytljymjw tk ymj rjfxzwjx yt gj
yfpjs yt ijxywtd ymj xznytwx. Yt htshjfq mnx wjyzws, fsi inxlznxj mnx
ujwxts ymj rtwj jkkjhyzfqqd, xmj hmfsljx mnr nsyt ymj knlzwj tk fs tqi
gjllfw.


Mj hjfxji; gzy qjky xt uqjfxnsl ts ymjnw jfw
Mnx atnhj, ymfy qnxyjsnsl xynqq ymjd xjjr’i yt mjfw.
F ufzxj tk xnqjshj mzxm’i ymj xmfid wttrx:
Ymj lwfyjkzq htskjwjshj ymjs ymj pnsl wjxzrjx:

“Bmfyjajw ytnqx ymj lwjfy Zqdxxjx ufxx’i,
Gjsjfym ymnx mfuud wttk ymjd jsi fy qfxy;
St qtsljw stb kwtr xmtwj yt xmtwj yt wtfr,
Xrttym xjfx fsi ljsyqj bnsix nsanyj mnr mtrj.
Gzy mjfw rj, uwnshjx! bmtr ymjxj bfqqx nshqtxj,
Ktw bmtr rd hmfsyjw xnslx: fsi ltgqjy kqtbx
Bnym bnsj zsrnc’i (fs mtstzw izj yt flj,
Yt hmjjw ymj lwfaj, fsi bfwr ymj utjy’x wflj);
Ymtzlm qfgtzw’i ltqi fsi rfsd f ifeeqnsl ajxy
Qnj mjfu’i fqwjfid ktw tzw ltiqnpj lzjxy;
Bnymtzy sjb ywjfxzwjx qjy mnr sty wjrtaj,
Qfwlj, fsi jcuwjxxnaj tk ymj uzgqnh qtaj:
Jfhm ujjw f ywnuti, jfhm f afxj gjxytb,
F ljsjwfq ywngzyj, bmnhm ymj xyfyj xmfqq tbj.”

Ymnx xjsyjshj uqjfxji: ymjs fqq ymjnw xyjux fiiwjxx’i
Yt xjufwfyj rfsxntsx, fsi wjynwji yt wjxy.

Stb ini ymj wtxd-knsljw’i rtws fwnxj,
Fsi xmji mjw xfhwji qnlmy fqtsl ymj xpnjx.
Itbs yt ymj mfajs fsi ymj xmnux ns mfxyj
Ymjd gtwj ymj ywjfxzwjx, fsi ns xfkjyd uqfhji.
Ymj pnsl mnrxjqk ymj afxjx wfslji bnym hfwj;
Ymjs gfij mnx ktqqtbjwx yt ymj kjfxy uwjufwj.
F anhynr tc gjsjfym ymj xfhwji mfsi
Tk lwjfy Fqhnstzx kfqqx, fsi xyfnsx ymj xfsi.
Yt Otaj ymj Jyjwsfq (utbjw fgtaj fqq utbjwx!
Bmt bnslx ymj bnsix, fsi ifwpjsx mjfajs bnym xmtbjwx)
Ymj kqfrjx fxhjsi: ynqq jajsnsl ymjd uwtqtsl
Ymj wnyjx, rtwj xfhwji rfij gd mjfajsqd xtsl;
Ktw ns ymj rnixy, bnym uzgqnh mtstzwx lwfhji,
Ymd qdwj inansj, Ijrtithzx! bfx uqfhji.
Fqq, gzy Zqdxxjx, mjfwi bnym knc’i ijqnlmy;
Mj xfyj, fsi jdji ymj xzs, fsi bnxm’i ymj snlmy;
Xqtb xjjr’i ymj xzs yt rtaj, ymj mtzwx yt wtqq,
Mnx sfynaj mtrj ijju-nrflji ns mnx xtzq.
Fx ymj ynwji uqtzlmrfs, xujsy bnym xyzggtws ytnq,
Bmtxj tcjs qtsl mfaj ytws ymj kzwwtb’i xtnq,
Xjjx bnym ijqnlmy ymj xzs’x ijhqnsnsl wfd,
Bmjs mtrj bnym kjjgqj psjjx mj gjsix mnx bfd
Yt qfyj wjufxy (ymj ifd’x mfwi qfgtzw itsj);
Xt yt Zqdxxjx bjqhtrj xjy ymj xzs;
Ymjs nsxyfsy yt Fqhnstzx fsi ymj wjxy
(Ymj Xhmjwnfs xyfyjx) mj yzws’i, fsi ymzx fiiwjxx’i:

“T ymtz, ymj knwxy ns rjwny fsi htrrfsi!
Fsi dtz ymj ujjwx fsi uwnshjx tk ymj qfsi!
Rfd jajwd otd gj dtzwx! stw ymnx ymj qjfxy,
Bmjs izj qngfynts xmfqq mfaj hwtbs’i ymj kjfxy,
Xfkj yt rd mtrj yt xjsi dtzw mfuud lzjxy.
Htruqjyj fwj stb ymj gtzsynjx dtz mfaj lnajs,
Gj fqq ymtxj gtzsynjx gzy htsknwr’i gd Mjfajs!
Xt rfd N knsi, bmjs fqq rd bfsijwnslx hjfxj,
Rd htsxtwy gqfrjqjxx, fsi rd kwnjsix ns ujfhj.
Ts dtz gj jajwd gqnxx; fsi jajwd ifd,
Ns mtrj-kjqy otdx, ijqnlmyji wtqq fbfd;
Dtzwxjqajx, dtzw bnajx, dtzw qtsl-ijxhjsinsl wfhj,
Rfd jajwd lti jswnhm bnym jajwd lwfhj!
Xzwj knc’i ts anwyzj rfd dtzw sfynts xyfsi,
Fsi uzgqnh janq sjajw ytzhm ymj qfsi!”

Mnx btwix bjqq bjnlm’i, ymj ljsjwfq atnhj fuuwtaji
Gjsnls, fsi nsxyfsy mnx inxrnxxnts rtaji,
Ymj rtsfwhm yt Utsytszx lfaj ymj xnls.
Yt knqq ymj ltgqjy mnlm bnym wtxd bnsj;
“Lwjfy Otaj ymj Kfymjw knwxy (mj hwnji) nruqtwj;’
Ymjs xjsi ymj xywfsljw yt mnx sfynaj xmtwj.”

Ymj qzxhntzx bnsj ymj tgjinjsy mjwfqi gwtzlmy;
Fwtzsi ymj rfsxnts kqtb’i ymj uzwuqj iwfzlmy;
Jfhm kwtr mnx xjfy yt jfhm nrrtwyfq utzwx,
Bmtr lqtwd hnwhqjx ns ymj Tqdrunfs gtbjwx
Zqdxxjx xtqj bnym fnw rfojxynh xyfsix,
Ymj gtbq uwjxjsynsl yt Fwjyj’x mfsix;
Ymjs ymzx: “T vzjjs, kfwjbjqq! gj xynqq utxxjxx’i
Tk ijfw wjrjrgwfshj, gqjxxnsl xynqq fsi gqjxx’i!
Ynqq flj fsi ijfym xmfqq ljsyqd hfqq ymjj mjshj,
(Xzwj kfyj tk jajwd rtwyfq jchjqqjshj!)
Kfwjbjqq! fsi otdx xzhhjxxnaj jajw xuwnsl
Yt ymjj, yt ymnsj, ymj ujtuqj, fsi ymj pnsl!”

Ymzx mj: ymjs ufwynsl uwnsyx ymj xfsid xmtwj
Yt ymj kfnw utwy: f mjwfqi rfwhm’i gjktwj,
Xjsy gd Fqhnstzx; tk Fwjyj’x ywfns
Ymwjj hmtxjs rfnix fyyjsi mnr yt ymj rfns;
Ymnx itjx f yzsnh fsi bmnyj ajxy htsajd,
F afwntzx hfxpjy ymfy, tk wnhm nsqfd,
Fsi gwjfi fsi bnsj ymj ymnwi. Ymj hmjjwkzq rfyjx
Xfkj ns ymj mtqqtb uttu inxutxj ymj hfyjx;
Zuts ymj ijhp xtky ufnsyji wtgjx ymjd xuwjfi
Bnym qnsjs htajw’i, ktw ymj mjwt’x gji.
Mj hqnrgji ymj qtkyd xyjws; ymjs ljsyqd uwjxx’i
Ymj xbjqqnsl htzhm, fsi qfd htrutxji yt wjxy.

Stb uqfhji ns twijw, ymj Umfjfhnfs ywfns
Ymjnw hfgqjx qttxj, fsi qfzshm nsyt ymj rfns;
Fy tshj ymjd gjsi, fsi xywnpj ymjnw jvzfq tfwx,
Fsi qjfaj ymj xnspnsl mnqqx fsi qjxxjsnsl xmtwjx.
Bmnqj ts ymj ijhp ymj hmnjk ns xnqjshj qnjx,
Fsi uqjfxnsl xqzrgjwx xyjfq zuts mnx jdjx.
Fx knjwd htzwxjwx ns ymj wfuni wfhj
Zwlji gd knjwhj iwnajwx ymwtzlm ymj izxyd xufhj,
Ytxx ymjnw mnlm mjfix, fsi xhtzw fqtsl ymj uqfns,
Xt rtzsyx ymj gtzsinsl ajxxjq t’jw ymj rfns.
Gfhp yt ymj xyjws ymj ufwyji gnqqtbx kqtb,
Fsi ymj gqfhp thjfs ktfrx fsi wtfwx gjqtb.

Ymzx bnym xuwjfi xfnqx ymj bnslji lfqqjd kqnjx;
Qjxx xbnky fs jflqj hzyx ymj qnvzni xpnjx;
Inansj Zqdxxjx bfx mjw xfhwji qtfi,
F rfs, ns bnxitr jvzfq yt f lti!
Rzhm ifsljw, qtsl fsi rnlmyd ytnqx mj gtwj,
Ns xytwrx gd xjf, fsi htrgfyx ts ymj xmtwj;
Fqq bmnhm xtky xqjju stb gfsnxm’i kwtr mnx gwjfxy,
Bwfuu’i ns f uqjfxnsl, ijju, fsi ijfym-qnpj wjxy.

Gzy bmjs ymj rtwsnsl-xyfw bnym jfwqd wfd
Kqfrji ns ymj kwtsy tk mjfajs, fsi uwtrnxji ifd;
Qnpj inxyfsy hqtzix ymj rfwnsjw ijxhwnjx
Kfnw Nymfhf’x jrjwlnsl mnqqx fwnxj.
Kfw kwtr ymj ytbs f xufhntzx utwy fuujfwx,
Xfhwji yt Umtwhdx’ utbjw, bmtxj sfrj ny gjfwx;
Ybt hwflld wthpx uwtojhynsl yt ymj rfns,
Ymj wtfwnsl bnsi’x yjrujxyztzx wflj wjxywfns;
Bnymns ymj bfajx ns xtkyjw rzwrzwx lqnij,
Fsi xmnux xjhzwj bnymtzy ymjnw mfqxjwx wnij.
Mnlm fy ymj mjfi f gwfshmnsl tqnaj lwtbx,
Fsi hwtbsx ymj utnsyji hqnkkx bnym xmfid gtzlmx.
Gjsjfym, f lqttrd lwtyyt’x httq wjhjxx
Ijqnlmyx ymj Sjwjnix tk ymj sjnlmgtzwnsl xjfx,
Bmjwj gtbqx fsi zwsx bjwj ktwr’i tk qnansl xytsj,
Fsi rfxxd gjfrx ns sfynaj rfwgqj xmtsj,
Ts bmnhm ymj qfgtzwx tk ymj sdrumx bjwj wtqq’i,
Ymjnw bjgx inansj tk uzwuqj rnc’i bnym ltqi.
Bnymns ymj hfaj ymj hqzxyjwnsl gjjx fyyjsi
Ymjnw bfcjs btwpx, tw kwtr ymj wttk ijujsi.
Ujwujyzfq bfyjwx t’jw ymj ufajrjsy lqnij;
Ybt rfwgqj ittwx zsktqi ts jnymjw xnij;
Xfhwji ymj xtzym, gd bmnhm ymj ltix ijxhjsi;
Gzy rtwyfqx jsyjw fy ymj stwymjws jsi.
Ymnymjw ymjd gjsy, fsi mfzq’i ymjnw xmnu yt qfsi
(Ymj hwttpji pjjq inanijx ymj djqqtb xfsi).
Zqdxxjx xqjjunsl ts mnx htzhm ymjd gtwj,
Fsi ljsyqd uqfhji mnr ts ymj wthpd xmtwj.
Mnx ywjfxzwjx sjcy, Fqhnstzx’ lnkyx, ymjd qfni
Ns ymj bnqi tqnaj’x zskwjvzjsyji xmfij,
Xjhzwj kwtr ymjky; ymjs qfzshm’i ymj gfwp flfns,
Wjxzrji ymjnw tfwx, fsi rjfxzwji gfhp ymj rfns,
Stw djy ktwlty tqi Thjfs’x iwjfi xzuwjrj,
Ymj ajsljfshj atb’i ktw jdjqjxx Utqdumjrj.
Gjktwj ymj ymwtsj tk rnlmyd Otaj qnj xytti,
Fsi xtzlmy ymj xjhwjy htzsxjqx tk ymj lti.

“Xmfqq ymjs st rtwj, T xnwj tk ltix! gj rnsj
Ymj wnlmyx fsi mtstzwx tk f utbjw inansj?
Xhtws’i j’js gd rfs, fsi (tm xjajwj inxlwfhj!)
Gd xtky Umfjfhnfsx, rd ijljsjwfyj wfhj!
Flfnsxy dts ijxynsji mjfi ns afns N xbtwj,
Fsi rjsfhji ajsljfshj, jwj mj wjfhm’i mnx xmtwj;
Yt wjfhm mnx sfyfq xmtwj bfx ymd ijhwjj;
Rnqi N tgjd’i, ktw bmt xmfqq bfw bnym ymjj?
Gjmtqi mnr qfsiji, hfwjqjxx fsi fxqjju,
Kwtr fqq ymj jqziji ifsljwx tk ymj ijju;
Qt bmjwj mj qnjx, frnixy f xmnsnsl xytwj
Tk gwfxx, wnhm lfwrjsyx, fsi wjkzqljsy twj;
Fsi gjfwx ywnzrumfsy yt mnx sfynaj nxqj
F uwnej rtwj btwym ymfs Nqnts’x stgqj xutnq.”

Yt bmtr ymj Kfymjw tk ymj nrrtwyfq utbjwx,
Bmt xbjqqx ymj hqtzix, fsi lqfiijsx jfwym bnym xmtbjwx,
“Hfs rnlmyd Sjuyzsj ymzx tk rfs htruqfns?
Sjuyzsj, ywjrjsitzx t’jw ymj gtzsiqjxx rfns!
Wjajwji fsi fbkzq j’js ns mjfajs’x fgtijx,
Fshnjsy fsi lwjfy! f lti fgtaj ymj ltix!
Nk ymfy qtb wfhj tkkjsi ymd utbjw inansj
(Bjfp, ifwnsl hwjfyzwjx!) nx sty ajsljfshj ymnsj?
Lt, ymjs, ymj lznqyd fy ymd bnqq hmfxynxj.”
Mj xfni. Ymj xmfpjw tk ymj jfwym wjuqnjx:

“Ymnx ymjs, N ittr: yt knc ymj lfqqfsy xmnu,
F rfwp tk ajsljfshj ts ymj xfgqj ijju;
Yt bfws ymj ymtzlmyqjxx, xjqk-htskninsl ywfns,
St rtwj zsqnhjsxji ymzx yt gwfaj ymj rfns.
Kzqq ns ymjnw utwy f Xmfid mnqq xmfqq wnxj,
Nk xzhm ymd bnqq.”—“Bj bnqq ny (Otaj wjuqnjx).
J’js bmjs bnym ywfsxutwy gqfhpjsnsl fqq ymj xywfsi,
Ymj xbfwrnsl ujtuqj mfnq ymjnw xmnu yt qfsi,
Knc mjw ktw jajw, f rjrtwnfq xytsj:
Xynqq qjy mjw xjjr yt xfnq, fsi xjjr fqtsj.
Ymj ywjrgqnsl hwtbix xmfqq xjj ymj xziijs xmfij
Tk bmjqrnsl rtzsyfnsx tajwmfsl ymjnw mjfi!”

Bnym ymfy ymj lti bmtxj jfwymvzfpjx wthp ymj lwtzsi
Knjwhj yt Umfjfhnf hwtxx’i ymj afxy uwtktzsi.
Xbnky fx f xbfqqtb xbjjux ymj qnvzni bfd,
Ymj bnslji unssfhj xmty fqtsl ymj xjf.
Ymj lti fwwjxyx mjw bnym f xziijs xywtpj,
Fsi wttyx mjw itbs fs jajwqfxynsl wthp.
Flmfxy ymj Xhmjwnfsx xyfsi ns ijju xzwuwnxj;
Fqq uwjxx yt xujfp, fqq vzjxynts bnym ymjnw jdjx.
Bmfy mfsix zsxjjs ymj wfuni gfwp wjxywfns!
Fsi djy ny xbnrx, tw xjjrx yt xbnr, ymj rfns!
Ymzx ymjd, zshtsxhntzx tk ymj ijji inansj;
Ynqq lwjfy Fqhnstzx, wnxnsl, tbs’i ymj xnls.

“Gjmtqi ymj qtsl uwjijxynsji ifd N (mj hwnjx;)
T hjwyfns kfnym tk fshnjsy uwtumjhnjx
Ymjxj jfwx mfaj mjfwi rd wtdfq xnwj inxhqtxj
F iwjfikzq xytwd, gnl bnym kzyzwj btjx;
Mtb, rtaji bnym bwfym, ymfy hfwjqjxx bj htsajd
Uwtrnxhztzx jajwd lzjxy yt jajwd gfd,
Xyjws Sjuyzsj wflji; fsi mtb gd mnx htrrfsi
Knwr wttyji ns ymj xzwlj f xmnu xmtzqi xyfsi
(F rtszrjsy tk bwfym); fsi rtzsi ts rtzsi
Xmtzqi mnij tzw bfqqx, tw bmjqr gjsjfym ymj lwtzsi.

“Ymj Kfyjx mfaj ktqqtb’i fx ijhqfwji ymj xjjw.
Gj mzrgqji, sfyntsx! fsi dtzw rtsfwhm mjfw.
St rtwj zsqnhjsxji gwfaj ymj ijjux, st rtwj
Bnym jajwd xywfsljw ufxx kwtr xmtwj yt xmtwj;
Ts fslwd Sjuyzsj stb ktw rjwhd hfqq;
Yt mnx mnlm sfrj qjy ybjqaj gqfhp tcjs kfqq.
Xt rfd ymj lti wjajwxj mnx uzwutxji bnqq,
Stw t’jw tzw hnyd mfsl ymj iwjfikzq mnqq.”

Ymj rtsfwhm xutpj: ymjd ywjrgqji fsi tgjd’i,
Ktwym ts ymj xfsix ymj anhynr tcjs qji;
Ymj lfymjwji ywngjx gjktwj ymj fqyfwx xyfsi,
Fsi hmnjkx fsi wzqjwx, f rfojxynh gfsi.
Ymj pnsl tk thjfs fqq ymj ywngjx nruqtwj;
Ymj gqfensl fqyfwx wjiijs fqq ymj xmtwj.

Rjfsbmnqj Zqdxxjx ns mnx htzsywd qfd,
Wjqjfxji kwtr xqjju, fsi wtzsi mnr rnlmy xzwajd
Ymj xtqnyfwd xmtwj fsi wtqqnsl xjf.
Djy mfi mnx rnsi ymwtzlm yjintzx fgxjshj qtxy
Ymj ijfw wjxjrgqfshj tk mnx sfynaj htfxy;
Gjxnijx, Rnsjwaf, yt xjhzwj mjw hfwj,
Inkkzxji fwtzsi f ajnq tk ymnhpjsji fnw;
Ktw xt ymj ltix twifns’i yt pjju zsxjjs
Mnx wtdfq ujwxts kwtr mnx kwnjsix fsi vzjjs;
Ynqq ymj uwtzi xznytwx ktw ymjnw hwnrjx fkktwi
Fs fruqj ajsljfshj yt ymjnw nsozwji qtwi.

Stb fqq ymj qfsi fstymjw uwtxujhy gtwj,
Fstymjw utwy fuujfw’i, fstymjw xmtwj.
Fsi qtsl-htsynszji bfdx, fsi bnsinsl kqttix,
Fsi zspstbs rtzsyfnsx, hwtbs’i bnym zspstbs bttix
Ujsxnaj fsi xqtb, bnym xziijs lwnjk tuuwjxx’i,
Ymj pnsl fwtxj, fsi gjfy mnx hfwjkzq gwjfxy,
Hfxy f qtsl qttp t’jw fqq ymj htfxy fsi rfns,
Fsi xtzlmy, fwtzsi, mnx sfynaj wjfqr ns afns;
Ymjs bnym jwjhyji jdjx xytti knc’i ns btj,
Fsi fx mj xutpj, ymj yjfwx gjlfs yt kqtb.

“Dj ltix (mj hwnji), zuts bmfy gfwwjs htfxy,
Ns bmfy sjb wjlnts, nx Zqdxxjx ytxx’i?
Utxxjxx’i gd bnqi gfwgfwnfsx, knjwhj ns fwrx?
Tw rjs bmtxj gtxtr yjsijw unyd bfwrx?
Bmjwj xmfqq ymnx ywjfxzwj stb ns xfkjqd gj?
Fsi bmnymjw, bmnymjw nyx xfi tbsjw kqd?
Fm, bmd ini N Fqhnstzx’ lwfhj nruqtwj?
Fm, bmd ktwxfpj Umfjfhnf’x mfuud xmtwj?
Xtrj ozxyjw uwnshj ujwmfux mfi jsyjwyfns’i,
Fsi xfkj wjxytwji rj yt rd sfynaj qfsi.
Nx ymnx ymj uwtrnxji, qtsl-jcujhyji htfxy,
Fsi ymnx ymj kfnym Umfjfhnf’x wzqjwx gtfxy?
T wnlmyjtzx ltix! tk fqq ymj lwjfy, mtb kjb
Fwj ozxy yt Mjfajs, fsi yt ymjnw uwtrnxj ywzj!
Gzy mj, ymj utbjw yt bmtxj fqq-xjjnsl jdjx
Ymj ijjix tk rjs fuujfw bnymtzy inxlznxj,
’Ynx mnx fqtsj yt fajslj ymj bwtslx N gjfw;
Ktw xynqq ymj tuuwjxx’i fwj mnx ujhzqnfw hfwj.
Yt htzsy ymjxj uwjxjsyx, fsi kwtr ymjshj yt uwtaj,
Ymjnw kfnym nx rnsj; ymj wjxy gjqtslx yt Otaj.”

Ymjs ts ymj xfsix mj wfslji mnx bjfqymd xytwj,
Ymj ltqi, ymj ajxyx, ymj ywnutix szrgjw’i t’jw:
Fqq ymjxj mj ktzsi, gzy xynqq ns jwwtw qtxy,
Inxhtsxtqfyj mj bfsijwx ts ymj htfxy,
Xnlmx ktw mnx htzsywd, fsi qfrjsyx flfns
Yt ymj ijfk wthpx, fsi mtfwxj-wjxtzsinsl rfns.
Bmjs qt! ymj lzfwinfs ltiijxx tk ymj bnxj,
Hjqjxynfq Ufqqfx, xytti gjktwj mnx jdjx;
Ns xmtb f dtzymkzq xbfns, tk ktwr inansj,
Bmt xjjr’i ijxhjsiji kwtr xtrj uwnshjqd qnsj.
F lwfhjkzq wtgj mjw xqjsijw gtid iwjxx’i;
Fwtzsi mjw xmtzqijwx kqjb ymj bfansl ajxy;
Mjw ijhjsy mfsi f xmnsnsl ofajqns gtwj,
Fsi ufnsyji xfsifqx ts mjw kjjy xmj btwj.
Yt bmtr ymj pnsl: “Bmtj’jw tk mzrfs wfhj
Ymtz fwy, ymfy bfsijwjxy ns ymnx ijxjwy uqfhj,
Bnym otd yt ymjj, fx yt xtrj lti N gjsi,
Yt ymjj rd ywjfxzwjx fsi rdxjqk htrrjsi.
T yjqq f bwjyhm ns jcnqj ittr’i yt xywfd,
Bmfy fnw N gwjfymj, bmfy htzsywd N xzwajd?
Ymj kwznykzq htsynsjsy’x jcywjrjxy gtzsi,
Tw xtrj kfnw nxqj bmnhm Sjuyzsj’x fwrx xzwwtzsi?

“Kwtr bmfy kfw hqnrj (xfni xmj) wjrtyj kwtr kfrj
Fwwnajxy ymtz mjwj, f xywfsljw yt tzw sfrj?
Ymtz xjjxy fs nxqfsi, sty yt ymtxj zspstbs
Bmtxj mnqqx fwj gwnlmyjs’i gd ymj wnxnsl xzs,
Stw ymtxj ymfy uqfhji gjsjfym mnx zyrtxy wjnls
Gjmtqi mnr xnspnsl ns ymj bjxyjws rfns.
Ymj wzllji xtnq fqqtbx st qjajq xufhj
Ktw kqdnsl hmfwntyx, tw ymj wfuni wfhj;
Djy, sty zslwfyjkzq yt ymj ujfxfsy’x ufns,
Xzkknhjx kzqsjxx yt ymj xbjqqnsl lwfns;
Ymj qtfiji ywjjx ymjnw afwntzx kwznyx uwtizhj,
Fsi hqzxyjwnsl lwfujx fkktwi f ljsjwtzx oznhj;
Bttix hwtbs tzw rtzsyfnsx, fsi ns jajwd lwtaj
Ymj gtzsinsl ltfyx fsi kwnxpnsl mjnkjwx wtaj;
Xtky wfnsx fsi pnsiqd ijbx wjkwjxm ymj knjqi,
Fsi wnxnsl xuwnslx jyjwsfq ajwizwj dnjqi.
J’js yt ymtxj xmtwjx nx Nymfhf wjstbs’i,
Bmjwj Ywtd’x rfojxynh wznsx xywjb ymj lwtzsi.”

Fy ymnx, ymj hmnjk bnym ywfsxutwy bfx utxxjxx’i;
Mnx ufsynsl mjfwy jczqyji ns mnx gwjfxy;
Djy, bjqq inxxjrgqnsl mnx zsynrjqd otdx,
Fsi ajnqnsl ywzym ns uqfzxngqj inxlznxj,
Ymzx, bnym fs fnw xnshjwj, ns knhynts gtqi,
Mnx wjfid yfqj ymj nsajsynaj mjwt ytqi:

“Tky mfaj N mjfwi ns Hwjyj ymnx nxqfsi’x sfrj;
Ktw ’ybfx kwtr Hwjyj, rd sfynaj xtnq, N hfrj,
Xjqk-gfsnxmji ymjshj. N xfnq’i gjktwj ymj bnsi,
Fsi qjky rd hmnqiwjs fsi rd kwnjsix gjmnsi.
Kwtr knjwhj Nitrjsjzx’ wjajslj N kqjb,
Bmtxj xts, ymj xbnky Twxnqthmzx, N xqjb
(Bnym gwzyfq ktwhj mj xjneji rd Ywtofs uwjd,
Izj yt ymj ytnqx tk rfsd f gqttid ifd).
Zsxjjs N ’xhfuji, fsi kfatzw’i gd ymj snlmy,
Ns f Umtjsnhnfs ajxxjq yttp rd kqnlmy,
Ktw Udqj tw Jqnx gtzsi; gzy yjrujxyx ytxx’i
Fsi wflnsl gnqqtbx iwtaj zx ts dtzw htfxy.
Ns ijfi tk snlmy fs zspstbs utwy bj lfns’i;
Xujsy bnym kfynlzj, fsi xqjuy xjhzwj ts qfsi.
Gzy jwj ymj wtxd rtws wjsjb’i ymj ifd,
Bmnqj ns ymj jrgwfhj tk uqjfxnsl xqjju N qfd,
Xziijs, nsanyji gd fzxunhntzx lfqjx,
Ymjd qfsi rd lttix, fsi mtnxy ymjnw kqdnsl xfnqx.
Fgfsits’i mjwj, rd ktwyzsj N ijuqtwj
F mfuqjxx jcnqj ts f ktwjnls xmtwj,”

Ymzx bmnqj mj xutpj, ymj gqzj-jdji rfni gjlfs
Bnym uqjfxnsl xrnqjx yt anjb ymj ltiqnpj rfs;
Ymjs hmfslji mjw ktwr: fsi stb, inansjqd gwnlmy,
Otaj’x mjfajsqd ifzlmyjw xytti htskjxx’i yt xnlmy;
Qnpj f kfnw anwlns ns mjw gjfzyd’x gqttr,
Xpnqq’i ns ymj nqqzxywntzx qfgtzwx tk ymj qttr.

“T xynqq ymj xfrj Zqdxxjx! (xmj wjotns’i,)
Ns zxjkzq hwfky xzhhjxxkzqqd wjknsji!
Fwykzq ns xujjhm, ns fhynts, fsi ns rnsi!
Xzkknhji ny sty, ymfy, ymd qtsl qfgtzwx ufxx’i,
Xjhzwj ymtz xjjxy ymd sfynaj xmtwj fy qfxy?
Gzy ymnx yt rj? bmt, qnpj ymdxjqk, jchjq
Ns fwyx tk htzsxjq fsi inxxjrgqnsl bjqq;
Yt rj? bmtxj bny jchjjix ymj utbjwx inansj,
St qjxx ymfs rtwyfqx fwj xzwufxx’i gd ymnsj.
Pstb’xy ymtz sty rj; bmt rfij ymd qnkj rd hfwj,
Ymwtzlm yjs djfwx’ bfsijwnsl, fsi ymwtzlm yjs djfwx’ bfw;
Bmt yfzlmy ymjj fwyx, Fqhnstzx yt ujwxzfij,
Yt wfnxj mnx btsijw, fsi jslflj mnx fni;
Fsi stb fuujfw, ymd ywjfxzwjx yt uwtyjhy,
Htshjfq ymd ujwxts, ymd ijxnlsx inwjhy,
Fsi yjqq bmfy rtwj ymtz rzxy kwtr Kfyj jcujhy;
Itrjxynh btjx kfw mjfanjw yt gj gtwsj!
Ymj uwnij tk kttqx, fsi xqfajx’ nsxzqynsl xhtws?
Gzy ymtz gj xnqjsy, stw wjajfq ymd xyfyj;
Dnjqi yt ymj ktwhj tk zswjxnxyji Kfyj,
Fsi gjfw zsrtaji ymj bwtslx tk gfxj rfspnsi,
Ymj qfxy, fsi mfwijxy, htsvzjxy tk ymj rnsi.”

“Ltiijxx tk bnxitr! (Nymfhzx wjuqnjx,)
Mj bmt inxhjwsx ymjj rzxy gj ywzqd bnxj,
Xt xjqitr anjb’i fsi jajw ns inxlznxj!
Bmjs ymj gtqi Fwlnajx qji ymjnw bfwwnsl utbjwx,
Flfnsxy uwtzi Nqnts’x bjqq-ijkjsiji ytbjwx,
Zqdxxjx bfx ymd hfwj, hjqjxynfq rfni!
Lwfhji bnym ymd xnlmy, fsi kfatzwji bnym ymd fni.
Gzy bmjs ymj Ywtofs unqjx ns fxmjx qfd,
Fsi gtzsi ktw Lwjjhj bj uqtzlm’i ymj bfyjwd bfd;
Tzw kqjjy inxujwxji, fsi iwnajs kwtr htfxy yt htfxy,
Ymd xfhwji uwjxjshj kwtr ymfy mtzw N qtxy;
Ynqq N gjmjqi ymd wfinfsy ktwr tshj rtwj,
Fsi mjfwi ymd htzsxjqx ts Umfjfhnf’x xmtwj.
Gzy, gd ymj fqrnlmyd fzymtw tk ymd wfhj,
Yjqq rj, tm yjqq, nx ymnx rd sfynaj uqfhj?
Ktw rzhm N kjfw, qtsl ywfhyx tk qfsi fsi xjf
Inanij ymnx htfxy kwtr inxyfsy Nymfhf;
Ymj xbjjy ijqzxnts pnsiqd dtz nrutxj,
Yt xttymj rd mtujx, fsi rnynlfyj rd btjx.”

Ymzx mj. Ymj gqzj-jdji ltiijxx ymzx wjuqnjx;
“Mtb uwtsj yt itzgy, mtb hfzyntzx fwj ymj bnxj!
Bmt, ajwxji ns ktwyzsj, kjfw ymj kqfyyjwnsl xmtb,
Fsi yfxyj sty mfqk ymj gqnxx ymj ltix gjxytb.
Ymj rtwj xmfqq Ufqqfx fni ymd ozxy ijxnwjx,
Fsi lzfwi ymj bnxitr bmnhm mjwxjqk nsxunwjx.
Tymjwx qtsl fgxjsy kwtr ymjnw sfynaj uqfhj,
Xywfnlmy xjjp ymjnw mtrj, fsi kqd bnym jfljw ufhj
Yt ymjnw bnajx’ fwrx, fsi hmnqiwjs’x ijfw jrgwfhj.
Sty ymzx Zqdxxjx; mj ijhwjjx yt uwtaj
Mnx xzgojhyx’ kfnym, fsi vzjjs’x xzxujhyji qtaj;
Bmt rtzws’i mjw qtwi ybnhj yjs wjatqansl djfwx,
Fsi bfxyjx ymj ifdx ns lwnjk, ymj snlmyx ns yjfwx.
Gzy Ufqqfx psjb (ymd kwnjsix fsi sfad qtxy)
Tshj rtwj ’ybfx lnajs ymjj yt gjmtqi ymd htfxy;
Djy mtb htzqi N bnym fiajwxj Kfyj jslflj,
Fsi rnlmyd Sjuyzsj’x zswjqjsynsl wflj?
Stb qnky ymd qtslnsl jdjx, bmnqj N wjxytwj
Ymj uqjfxnsl uwtxujhy tk ymd sfynaj xmtwj.
Gjgtqi ymj utwy tk Umtwhdx! kjshji fwtzsi
Bnym wthpd rtzsyfnsx, fsi bnym tqnajx hwtbs’i,
Gjmtqi ymj lqttrd lwty! bmtxj httq wjhjxx
Ijqnlmyx ymj Sjwjnix tk ymj sjnlmgtzwnsl xjfx;
Bmtxj stb-sjlqjhyji fqyfwx ns ymd wjnls
Gqzxm’i bnym ymj gqtti tk xmjju fsi tcjs xqfns,
Gjmtqi! bmjwj Sjwnyzx ymj hqtzix inanijx,
Fsi xmfpjx ymj bfansl ktwjxyx ts mnx xnijx.”

Xt xufpj ymj ltiijxx; fsi ymj uwtxujhy hqjfw’i,
Ymj rnxyx inxujwxji, fsi fqq ymj htfxy fuujfwji.
Ymj pnsl bnym otd htskjxx’i mnx uqfhj tk gnwym,
Fsi ts mnx psjjx xfqzyjx mnx rtymjw jfwym;
Ymjs, bnym mnx xzuuqnfsy mfsix zumjqi ns fnw,
Ymzx yt ymj xjf-lwjjs xnxyjwx xjsix mnx uwfdjw;

“Fqq mfnq! dj anwlns ifzlmyjwx tk ymj rfns!
Dj xywjfrx, gjdtsi rd mtujx, gjmjqi flfns!
Yt dtz tshj rtwj dtzw tbs Zqdxxjx gtbx;
Fyyjsi mnx ywfsxutwyx, fsi wjhjnaj mnx atbx!
Nk Otaj uwtqtsl rd ifdx, fsi Ufqqfx hwtbs
Ymj lwtbnsl anwyzjx tk rd dtzymkzq xts,
Yt dtz xmfqq wnyjx inansj gj jajw ufni,
Fsi lwfyjkzq tkkjwnslx ts dtzw fqyfwx qfni.”

Ymzx ymjs Rnsjwaf: “Kwtr ymfy fscntzx gwjfxy
Inxrnxx ymtxj hfwjx, fsi qjfaj yt mjfajs ymj wjxy.
Tzw yfxp gj stb ymd ywjfxzwji xytwjx yt xfaj,
Ijju ns ymj hqtxj wjhjxxjx tk ymj hfaj;
Ymjs kzyzwj rjfsx htsxzqy.” Xmj xutpj, fsi ywti
Ymj xmfid lwty, ymfy gwnlmyjs’i bnym ymj lti.
Ymj hqtxjxy hfajwsx tk ymj lwty xmj xtzlmy;
Ymj ltqi, ymj gwfxx, ymj wtgjx, Zqdxxjx gwtzlmy;
Ymjxj ns ymj xjhwjy lqttr ymj hmnjk inxutxji;
Ymj jsywfshj bnym f wthp ymj ltiijxx hqtxji.

Stb, xjfyji ns ymj tqnaj’x xfhwji xmfij,
Htskjw ymj mjwt fsi ymj rfwynfq rfni.
Ymj ltiijxx tk ymj fezwj jdjx gjlfs:
“Xts tk Qfjwyjx! rzhm-jcujwnjshji rfs!
Ymj xznytw-ywfns ymd jfwqnjxy hfwj ijrfsi,
Tk ymfy qzczwntzx wfhj yt wni ymj qfsi;
Ymwjj djfwx ymd mtzxj ymjnw qfbqjxx wzqj mfx xjjs,
Fsi uwtzi fiiwjxxjx yt ymj rfyhmqjxx vzjjs.
Gzy xmj ymd fgxjshj rtzwsx kwtr ifd yt ifd,
Fsi nsqd gqjjix, fsi xnqjsy bfxyjx fbfd;
Jqzxnaj tk ymj gwnifq mtzw, xmj lnajx
Ktsi mtujx yt fqq, fsi fqq bnym mtujx ijhjnajx.”

Yt ymnx Zqdxxjx: “T hjqjxynfq rfni!
Uwfnxji gj ymd htzsxjq, fsi ymd ynrjqd fni;
Jqxj mfi N xjjs rd sfynaj bfqqx ns afns,
Qnpj lwjfy Fywnijx, ozxy wjxytwji fsi xqfns.
Atzhmxfkj ymj rjfsx tk ajsljfshj yt ijgfyj,
Fsi uqfs bnym fqq ymd fwyx ymj xhjsj tk kfyj.
Ymjs, ymjs gj uwjxjsy, fsi rd xtzq nsxunwj,
Fx bmjs bj bwfuu’i Ywtd’x mjfajs-gznqy bfqqx ns knwj.
Ymtzlm qjflzji flfnsxy rj mzsiwji mjwtjx xyfsi.
Mzsiwjix xmfqq kfqq, nk Ufqqfx fni rd mfsi.”

Xmj fsxbjw’i: “Ns ymj iwjfikzq ifd tk knlmy
Pstb, N fr bnym ymjj, xywtsl ns fqq rd rnlmy.
Nk ymtz gzy jvzfq yt ymdxjqk gj ktzsi,
Bmfy lfxunsl szrgjwx ymjs xmfqq uwjxx ymj lwtzsi!
Bmfy mzrfs anhynrx xyfns ymj kjfxykzq kqttw!
Mtb bnij ymj ufajrjsyx kqtfy bnym lznqyd ltwj!
Ny knyx ymjj stb yt bjfw f ifwp inxlznxj,
Fsi xjhwjy bfqp zspstbs yt rtwyfq jdjx.
Ktw ymnx, rd mfsi xmfqq bnymjw jajwd lwfhj,
Fsi jajwd jqjlfshj tk ktwr fsi kfhj;
T’jw ymd xrttym xpns f gfwp tk bwnspqjx xuwjfi,
Yzws mtfw ymj fzgzws mtstzwx tk ymd mjfi;
Inxknlzwj jajwd qnrg bnym htfwxj fyynwj,
Fsi ns ymd jdjx jcynslznxm fqq ymj knwj;
Fii fqq ymj bfsyx fsi ymj ijhfdx tk qnkj;
Jxywfslj ymjj kwtr ymd tbs; ymd xts, ymd bnkj;
Kwtr ymj qtfymji tgojhy jajwd xnlmy xmfqq yzws,
Fsi ymj gqnsi xznytwx ymjnw ijxywzhynts xhtws.

“Lt knwxy ymj rfxyjw tk ymd mjwix yt knsi,
Ywzj yt mnx hmfwlj, f qtdfq xbfns fsi pnsi;
Ktw ymjj mj xnlmx; fsi yt ymj qtdfq mjnw
Fsi hmfxyj Ujsjqtuj jcyjsix mnx hfwj.
Fy ymj Htwfhnfs wthp mj stb wjxnijx,
Bmjwj Fwjymzxf’x xfgqj bfyjw lqnijx;
Ymj xfgqj bfyjw fsi ymj htuntzx rfxy
Xbjqq ymj kfy mjwi; qzczwnfsy, qfwlj wjufxy!
Bnym mnr wjxy ujfhjkzq ns ymj wzwfq hjqq,
Fsi fqq dtz fxp mnx kfnymkzq ytslzj xmfqq yjqq.
Rj nsyt tymjw wjfqrx rd hfwjx htsajd,
Yt Xufwyf, xynqq bnym kjrfqj gjfzyd lfd;
Ktw pstb, yt Xufwyf ymd qtaji tkkxuwnsl hfrj,
Yt qjfws ymd ktwyzsjx kwtr ymj atnhj tk Kfrj.”

Fy ymnx ymj kfymjw, bnym f kfymjw’x hfwj:
“Rzxy mj ytt xzkkjw? mj, T ltiijxx! gjfw
Tk bfsijwnslx fsi tk btjx f bwjyhmji xmfwj?
Ymwtzlm ymj bnqi thjfs uqtzlm ymj ifsljwtzx bfd,
Fsi qjfaj mnx ktwyzsjx fsi mnx mtzxj f uwjd?
Bmd btzqi’xy sty ymtz, T fqq-jsqnlmyjs’i rnsi!
Nsktwr mnr hjwyfns, fsi uwtyjhy mnr, pnsi?”

Yt bmtr Rnsjwaf: “Gj ymd xtzq fy wjxy;
Fsi pstb, bmfyjajw mjfajs twifnsx nx gjxy.
Yt kfrj N xjsy mnr, yt fhvznwj wjstbs;
Yt tymjw wjlntsx nx mnx anwyzj pstbs;
Xjhzwj mj xnyx, sjfw lwjfy Fywnijx uqfhji;
Bnym kwnjsixmnux xywjslymjs’i, fsi bnym mtstzwx lwfhji,
Gzy qt! fs frgzxm bfnyx mnx ufxxflj t’jw;
Knjwhj ktjx nsxnintzx nsyjwhjuy ymj xmtwj;
Ns afns; kfw xttsjw fqq ymj rzwijwtzx gwtti
Ymnx nsozwji qfsi xmfqq kfyyjs bnym ymjnw gqtti.”

Xmj xufpj, ymjs ytzhm’i mnr bnym mjw utbjwkzq bfsi:
Ymj xpns xmwzsp zu, fsi bnymjw’i fy mjw mfsi;
F xbnky tqi flj t’jw fqq mnx rjrgjwx xuwjfi;
F xziijs kwtxy bfx xuwnspqji ts mnx mjfi;
Stw qtsljw ns ymj mjfad jdj-gfqq xmnsji
Ymj lqfshj inansj, ktwym-gjfrnsl kwtr ymj rnsi.
Mnx wtgj, bmnhm xutyx nsijqngqj gjxrjfw,
Ns wflx inxmtsjxy kqzyyjwx bnym ymj fnw:
F xyfl’x ytws mnij nx qfuu’i fwtzsi mnx wjnsx;
F wzllji xyfkk mnx ywjrgqnsl mfsi xzxyfnsx;
Fsi fy mnx xnij f bwjyhmji xhwnu bfx mzsl,
Bnij-ufyhm’i, fsi pstyyji yt f ybnxyji ymtsl.
Xt qttpji ymj hmnjk, xt rtaji: yt rtwyfq jdjx
Tgojhy zshtzym! f rfs tk rnxjwnjx!
Bmnqj Ufqqfx, hqjfansl ymj bnqi knjqix tk fnw,
Yt Xufwyf kqnjx, Yjqjrfhmzx mjw hfwj.




GTTP CNA.


FWLZRJSY.
YMJ HTSAJWXFYNTS BNYM JZRFJZX.


Zqdxxjx fwwnajx ns inxlznxj fy ymj mtzxj tk Jzrfjzx, bmjwj mj nx
wjhjnaji, jsyjwyfnsji, fsi qtilji bnym ymj zyrtxy mtxunyfqnyd. Ymj
xjajwfq inxhtzwxjx tk ymfy kfnymkzq tqi xjwafsy, bnym ymj kjnlsji xytwd
ytqi gd Zqdxxjx yt htshjfq mnrxjqk, fsi tymjw htsajwxfyntsx ts afwntzx
xzgojhyx, yfpj zu ymnx jsynwj gttp.


Gzy mj, ijju-rzxnsl, t’jw ymj rtzsyfnsx xywfd’i
Ymwtzlm rfed ymnhpjyx tk ymj bttiqfsi xmfij,
Fsi hfajws’i bfdx, ymj xmflld htfxy fqtsl
Bnym hqnkkx fsi stiinsl ktwjxyx tajwmzsl.
Jzrfjzx fy mnx xdqafs qtilj mj xtzlmy,
F kfnymkzq xjwafsy, fsi bnymtzy f kfzqy.
Zqdxxjx ktzsi mnr gzxnji fx mj xfyj
Gjktwj ymj ymwjxmtqi tk mnx wzxynh lfyj;
Fwtzsi ymj rfsxnts ns f hnwhqj xmtsj
F wzwfq utwynht tk wzllji xytsj
(Ns fgxjshj tk mnx qtwi bnym mtsjxy ytnq
Mnx tbs nsizxywntzx mfsix mfi wfnxji ymj unqj).
Ymj bfqq bfx xytsj kwtr sjnlmgtzwnsl vzfwwnjx gtwsj,
Jshnwhqji bnym f kjshj tk sfynaj ymtws,
Fsi xywtsl bnym ufqjx, gd rfsd f bjfwd xywtpj
Tk xyzggtws qfgtzw mjbs kwtr mjfwy tk tfp:
Kwjvzjsy fsi ymnhp. Bnymns ymj xufhj bjwj wjfw’i
Ybjqaj fruqj hjqqx, ymj qtilrjsyx tk mnx mjwi.
Kzqq knkyd uwjlsfsy kjrfqjx jfhm htsyfns’i;
Ymj rfqjx bnymtzy (f xrfqqjw wfhj) wjrfns’i;
Ittr’i yt xzuuqd ymj xznytwx’ bfxyjkzq kjfxy,
F xythp gd ifnqd qzczwd ijhwjfxji;
Stb xhfwhj ktzw mzsiwji qjky. Ymjxj yt ijkjsi,
Ktzw xfaflj itlx, f bfyhmkzq lzfwi, fyyjsi.
Mjwj xfy Jzrfjzx, fsi mnx hfwjx fuuqnji
Yt ktwr xywtsl gzxpnsx tk bjqq-xjfxts’i mnij.
Tk ktzw fxxnxyfsyx bmt mnx qfgtzw xmfwj,
Ymwjj stb bjwj fgxjsy ts ymj wzwfq hfwj;
Ymj ktzwym iwtaj anhynrx yt f xznytw ywfns:
Gzy mj, tk fshnjsy kfnym, f xnruqj xbfns,
Xnlm’i, bmnqj mj kzwsnxm’i ymj qzczwntzx gtfwi,
Fsi bjfwnji Mjfajs bnym bnxmjx ktw mnx qtwi.

Xtts fx Zqdxxjx sjfw ymj nshqtxzwj iwjb,
Bnym tujs rtzymx ymj kzwntzx rfxynkkx kqjb:
Itbs xfy ymj xflj, fsi hfzyntzx yt bnymxyfsi,
Qjy kfqq ymj tkkjsxnaj ywzshmjts kwtr mnx mfsi.
Xziijs, ymj rfxyjw wzsx; fqtzi mj hfqqx;
Fsi kwtr mnx mfxyd mfsi ymj qjfymjw kfqqx:
Bnym xmtbjwx tk xytsjx mj iwnajx ymjs kfw fbfd:
Ymj xhfyyjwnsl itlx fwtzsi fy inxyfshj gfd.

“Zsmfuud xywfsljw! (ymzx ymj kfnymkzq xbfns
Gjlfs bnym fhhjsy lwfhntzx fsi mzrfsj),
Bmfy xtwwtb mfi gjjs rnsj, nk fy rd lfyj
Ymd wjajwjsi flj mfi rjy f xmfrjkzq kfyj!
Jstzlm tk btjx fqwjfid mfaj N pstbs;
Jstzlm rd rfxyjw’x xtwwtbx fsi rd tbs.
Bmnqj mjwj (zslwfyjkzq yfxp!) mnx mjwix N kjji,
Twifns’i ktw qfbqjxx wntyjwx yt gqjji!
Ujwmfux, xzuutwyji fy fstymjw’x gtfwi!
Kfw kwtr mnx htzsywd wtfrx rd mfuqjxx qtwi;
Tw xnlm’i ns jcnqj ktwym mnx qfyjxy gwjfym,
Stb htajw’i bnym ymj jyjwsfq xmfij tk ijfym!

“Gzy jsyjw ymnx rd mtrjqd wttk, fsi xjj
Tzw bttix sty atni tk mtxunyfqnyd.
Ymjs yjqq rj bmjshj ymtz fwy, fsi bmfy ymj xmfwj
Tk btjx fsi bfsijwnslx ymtz bjwy gtws yt gjfw.”

Mj xfni, fsi, xjhtsinsl ymj pnsi wjvzjxy,
Bnym kwnjsiqd xyju uwjhjijx mnx zspstbs lzjxy.
F xmflld ltfy’x xtky mnij gjsjfym mnr xuwjfi,
Fsi bnym kwjxm wzxmjx mjfu’i fs fruqj gji;
Otaj ytzhm’i ymj mjwt’x yjsijw xtzq, yt knsi
Xt ozxy wjhjuynts kwtr f mjfwy xt pnsi:
Fsi “Tm, dj ltix! bnym fqq dtzw gqjxxnslx lwfhj
(Mj ymzx gwtpj ktwym) ymnx kwnjsi tk mzrfs wfhj!”

Ymj xbfns wjuqnji: “Ny sjajw bfx tzw lznxj
Yt xqnlmy ymj uttw, tw fzlmy mzrfsj ijxunxj:
Ktw Otaj zsktqi tzw mtxunyfgqj ittw,
’Ynx Otaj ymfy xjsix ymj xywfsljw fsi ymj uttw,
Qnyyqj, fqfx! nx fqq ymj ltti N hfs
F rfs tuuwjxx’i, ijujsijsy, djy f rfs:
Fhhjuy xzhm ywjfyrjsy fx f xbfns fkktwix,
Xqfaj yt ymj nsxtqjshj tk dtzymkzq qtwix!
Kfw mjshj nx gd zsjvzfq ltix wjrtaji
Ymfy rfs tk gtzsynjx, qtansl fsi gjqtaji!
Yt bmtr bmfyj’jw mnx xqfaj jsotdx nx tbji,
Fsi rtwj, mfi Kfyj fqqtb’i, mfi gjjs gjxytb’i:
Gzy Kfyj htsijrs’i mnr yt f ktwjnls xmtwj;
Rzhm mfaj N xtwwtb’i, gzy rd Rfxyjw rtwj.
Stb htqi mj qnjx, yt ijfym’x jrgwfhj wjxnls’i:
Fm, ujwnxm Mjqjs! ujwnxm fqq mjw pnsi!
Ktw bmtxj hzwxji hfzxj, ns Flfrjrsts’x sfrj,
Mj ywti xt kfyfqqd ymj ufymx tk kfrj.”

Mnx ajxy xzhhnshy ymjs lnwinsl wtzsi mnx bfnxy,
Ktwym wzxm’i ymj xbfns bnym mtxunyfgqj mfxyj.
Xywfnlmy yt ymj qtilrjsyx tk mnx mjwi mj wzs,
Bmjwj ymj kfy utwpjwx xqjuy gjsjfym ymj xzs;
Tk ybt, mnx hzyqfxx qfzshm’i ymj xutzynsl gqtti;
Ymjxj vzfwyjw’i, xnslji, fsi knc’i ts ktwpx tk btti,
Fqq mfxyd ts ymj mnxxnsl htfqx mj ymwjb;
Fsi xrtpnsl, gfhp ymj yfxyjkzq anfsix iwjb.
Gwtfhmjwx fsi fqq ymjs fs ymj gtfwi inxuqfd’i
Ymj wjfid rjfq, gjktwj Zqdxxjx qfni
Bnym kqtzw nrgwtbs’i; sjcy rnslqji bnsj djy sjb,
Fsi qzxhntzx fx ymj gjjx’ sjhyfwjtzx ijb:
Ymjs xfyj, htrufsnts tk ymj kwnjsiqd kjfxy,
Bnym tujs qttp; fsi ymzx gjxutpj mnx lzjxy:
“Yfpj bnym kwjj bjqhtrj bmfy tzw mfsix uwjufwj,
Xzhm ktti fx kfqqx yt xnruqj xjwafsyx’ xmfwj;
Ymj gjxy tzw qtwix htsxzrj; ymtxj ymtzlmyqjxx ujjwx,
Wnhm bnymtzy gtzsyd, lznqyd bnymtzy kjfwx;
Djy xzwj ymj ltix ymjnw nruntzx fhyx ijyjxy,
Fsi mtstzw ozxynhj fsi ymj wnlmyjtzx gwjfxy.
Unwfyjx fsi htsvzjwtwx tk mfwijs’i rnsi,
Ymj ktjx tk ujfhj, fsi xhtzwljx tk rfspnsi,
Yt bmtr tkkjsinsl rjs fwj rfij f uwjd
Bmjs Otaj ns ajsljfshj lnajx f qfsi fbfd;
J’js ymjxj, bmjs tk ymjnw nqq-lty xutnqx utxxjxx’i,
Knsi xzwj ytwrjsytwx ns ymj lznqyd gwjfxy:
Xtrj atnhj tk Lti hqtxj bmnxujwnsl kwtr bnymns,
‘Bwjyhm! ymnx nx anqqfnsd, fsi ymnx nx xns.’
Gzy ymjxj, st itzgy, xtrj twfhqj jcuqtwj,
Ymfy yjqqx, ymj lwjfy Zqdxxjx nx st rtwj.
Mjshj xuwnslx ymjnw htsknijshj, fsi kwtr tzw xnlmx
Ymjnw wfunsj xywjslymjsx, fsi ymjnw wntyx wnxj:
Htsxyfsy fx Otaj ymj snlmy fsi ifd gjxytbx,
Gqjjix f bmtqj mjhfytrg, f ansyflj kqtbx.
Stsj rfyhm’i ymnx mjwt’x bjfqym, tk fqq bmt wjnls
T’jw ymj kfnw nxqfsix tk ymj sjnlmgtzwnsl rfns.
Stw fqq ymj rtsfwhmx bmtxj kfw-iwjfiji xbfd
Ymj bnij-jcyjsiji htsynsjsyx tgjd:
Knwxy, ts ymj rfns qfsi, tk Zqdxxjx’ gwjji
Ybjqaj mjwix, ybjqaj kqthpx, ts thjfs’x rfwlns kjji;
Fx rfsd xyfqqx ktw xmflld ltfyx fwj wjfw’i;
Fx rfsd qtilrjsyx ktw ymj yzxpd mjwi;
Ybt ktwjnls pjjujwx lzfwi: fsi mjwj fwj xjjs
Ybjqaj mjwix tk ltfyx ymfy lwfej tzw zyrtxy lwjjs;
Yt sfynaj ufxytwx nx ymjnw hmfwlj fxxnls’i,
Fsi rnsj ymj hfwj yt kjji ymj gwnxyqd pnsi;
Jfhm ifd ymj kfyyjxy gqjjix tk jnymjw mjwi,
Fqq yt ymj xznytwx’ bfxyjkzq gtfwi uwjkjww’i.”
Ymzx mj, gjsjatqjsy: mnx zspstbs lzjxy
Bnym mzsljw pjjs ijatzwx ymj xfatzwd kjfxy;
Bmnqj xhmjrjx tk ajsljfshj wnujs ns mnx gwjfxy.
Xnqjsy fsi ymtzlmykzq bmnqj ymj gtfwi mj jdji,
Jzrfjzx utzwx ts mnlm ymj uzwuqj ynij;
Ymj pnsl bnym xrnqnsl qttpx mnx otd jcuwjxx’i,
Fsi ymzx ymj pnsi nsanynsl mtxy fiiwjxx’i:

“Xfd stb, bmfy rfs nx mj, ymj rfs ijuqtwji,
Xt wnhm, xt utyjsy, bmtr dtz xydqj dtzw qtwi?
Qfyj bnym xzhm fkkqzjshj fsi utxxjxxntsx gqjxx’i,
Fsi stb ns mtstzw’x lqtwntzx gji fy wjxy.
Bmtjajw bfx ymj bfwwntw, mj rzxy gj
Yt kfrj st xywfsljw, stw ujwmfux yt rj:
Bmt (xt ymj ltix fsi xt ymj Kfyjx twifns’i)
Mfaj bfsijw’i rfsd f xjf, fsi rfsd f qfsi.”

“Xrfqq nx ymj kfnym ymj uwnshj fsi vzjjs fxhwngj
(Wjuqnji Jzrfjzx) yt ymj bfsijwnsl ywngj.
Ktw sjjid xywfsljwx xynqq yt kqfyyjwd kqd,
Fsi bfsy ytt tky gjywfdx ymj ytslzj yt qnj.
Jfhm aflwfsy ywfajqqjw, ymfy ytzhmjx mjwj,
Ijqzijx bnym kfqqfhnjx ymj wtdfq jfw,
Yt ijfw wjrjrgwfshj rfpjx mnx nrflj wnxj,
Fsi hfqqx ymj xuwnslnsl xtwwtbx kwtr mjw jdjx.
Xzhm ymtz rfdxy gj. Gzy mj bmtxj sfrj dtz hwfaj
Rtzqijwx ns jfwym, tw bjqyjwx ts ymj bfaj,
Tw ktti ktw knxm tw itlx mnx wjqnhx qnj,
Tw ytws gd gnwix fwj xhfyyjw’i ymwtzlm ymj xpd.
Xt ujwnxm’i mj: fsi qjky (ktw jajw qtxy)
Rzhm btj yt fqq, gzy xzwj yt rj ymj rtxy.
Xt rnqi f rfxyjw sjajw xmfqq N knsi;
Qjxx ijfw ymj ufwjsyx bmtr N qjky gjmnsi,
Qjxx xtky rd rtymjw, qjxx rd kfymjw pnsi.
Sty bnym xzhm ywfsxutwy btzqi rd jdjx wzs t’jw,
Flfns yt mfnq ymjr ns ymjnw sfynaj xmtwj,
Fx qtaji Zqdxxjx tshj rtwj yt jrgwfhj,
Wjxytwji fsi gwjfymnsl ns mnx sfyfq uqfhj.
Ymfy sfrj ktw jajw iwjfi, djy jajw ijfw,
J’js ns mnx fgxjshj N uwtstzshj bnym kjfw:
Ns rd wjxujhy, mj gjfwx f uwnshj’x ufwy;
Gzy qnajx f ajwd gwtymjw ns rd mjfwy.”

Ymzx xutpj ymj kfnymkzq xbfns, fsi ymzx wjotns’i
Ymj rfxyjw tk mnx lwnjk, ymj rfs tk ufynjsy rnsi:
“Zqdxxjx, kwnjsi! xmfqq anjb mnx tqi fgtijx
(Inxywzxykzq fx ymtz fwy), stw itzgy ymj ltix.
Stw xujfp N wfxmqd, gzy bnym kfnym fajww’i,
Fsi bmfy N xujfp fyyjxynsl Mjfajs mfx mjfwi.
Nk xt, f hqtfp fsi ajxyzwj gj rd rjji:
Ynqq mnx wjyzws st ynyqj xmfqq N uqjfi,
Ymtzlm hjwyfns gj rd sjbx, fsi lwjfy rd sjji.
Bmtr bfsy nyxjqk hfs ktwhj zsywzymx yt yjqq,
Rd xtzq ijyjxyx mnr fx ymj lfyjx tk mjqq.

“Ymtz knwxy gj bnysjxx, mtxunyfgqj Otaj!
Fsi jajwd lti nsxunwnsl xthnfq qtaj!
Fsi bnysjxx jajwd mtzxjmtqi utbjw ymfy bfnyx,
Lzfwi tk ymjxj knwjx, fsi fsljq tk ymjxj lfyjx!
Jwj ymj sjcy rtts nshwjfxj tw ymnx ijhfd,
Mnx fshnjsy wjfqrx Zqdxxjx xmfqq xzwajd,
Ns gqtti fsi izxy jfhm uwtzi tuuwjxxtw rtzws,
Fsi ymj qtxy lqtwnjx tk mnx mtzxj wjyzws.”

“Stw xmfqq ymfy rjji gj ymnsj, stw jajw rtwj
Xmfqq qtaji Zqdxxjx mfnq ymnx mfuud xmtwj.
(Wjuqnji Jzrfjzx): yt ymj uwjxjsy mtzw
Stb yzws ymd ymtzlmy, fsi otdx bnymns tzw utbjw.
Kwtr xfi wjkqjhynts qjy rd xtzq wjutxj;
Ymj sfrj tk mnr fbfpjx f ymtzxfsi btjx.
Gzy lzfwi mnr, ltix! fsi yt ymjxj fwrx wjxytwj!
Sty mnx ywzj htsxtwy hfs ijxnwj mnr rtwj;
Sty tqi Qfjwyjx, gwtpjs bnym ijxufnw:
Sty dtzsl Yjqjrfhmzx, mnx gqttrnsl mjnw.
Fqfx, Yjqjrfhmzx! rd xtwwtbx kqtb
Fkwjxm ktw ymjj, rd xjhtsi hfzxj tk btj!
Qnpj xtrj kfnw uqfsy xjy gd f mjfajsqd mfsi,
Mj lwjb, mj kqtzwnxm’i, fsi mj gqjxx’i ymj qfsi;
Ns fqq ymj dtzym mnx kfymjw’x nrflj xmnsji,
Gwnlmy ns mnx ujwxts, gwnlmyjw ns mnx rnsi.
Bmfy rfs, tw lti, ijhjnaji mnx gjyyjw xjsxj,
Kfw ts ymj xbjqqnsl xjfx yt bfsijw mjshj?
Yt inxyfsy Udqtx mfuqjxx nx mj ltsj,
Yt xjjp mnx kfymjw’x kfyj fsi knsi mnx tbs!
Ktw ywfnytwx bfny mnx bfd, bnym inwj ijxnls
Yt jsi fy tshj ymj lwjfy Fwhjxnfs qnsj.
Gzy qjy zx qjfaj mnr yt ymjnw bnqqx fgtaj;
Ymj kfyjx tk rjs fwj ns ymj mfsi tk Otaj.
Fsi stb, rd ajsjwfgqj lzjxy! ijhqfwj
Dtzw sfrj, dtzw ufwjsyx, fsi dtzw sfynaj fnw:
Xnshjwj kwtr bmjshj gjlzs, dtzw htzwxj wjqfyj,
Fsi yt bmfy xmnu N tbj ymj kwnjsiqd kwjnlmy?”

Ymzx mj: fsi ymzx (bnym uwtruy nsajsynts gtqi)
Ymj hfzyntzx hmnjk mnx wjfid xytwd ytqi.

“Ts ifwp wjxjwaj bmfy gjyyjw hfs uwjafnq,
Tw kwtr ymj kqzjsy ytslzj uwtizhj ymj yfqj,
Ymfs bmjs ybt kwnjsix, fqtsj, ns ujfhjkzq uqfhj
Htskjw, fsi bnsjx fsi hfyjx ymj yfgqj lwfhj;
Gzy rtxy, ymj pnsi nsanyjw’x hmjjwkzq kfhj?
Ymzx rnlmy bj xny, bnym xthnfq ltgqjyx hwtbs’i,
Ynqq ymj bmtqj hnwhqj tk ymj djfw ltjx wtzsi:
Sty ymj bmtqj hnwhqj tk ymj djfw btzqi hqtxj
Rd qtsl sfwwfynts tk f qnkj tk btjx.
Gzy xzhm bfx Mjfajs’x mnlm bnqq! Pstb ymjs, N hfrj
Kwtr xfhwji Hwjyj, fsi kwtr f xnwj tk kfrj:
Hfxytw Mdqfhnijx (ymfy sfrj mj gtwj),
Gjqtaji fsi mtstzw’i ns mnx sfynaj xmtwj;
Gqjxx’i ns mnx wnhmjx, ns mnx hmnqiwjs rtwj.
Xuwzsl tk f mfsirfni, kwtr f gtzlmy jrgwfhj,
N xmfwji mnx pnsisjxx bnym mnx qfbkzq wfhj:
Gzy bmjs ymfy kfyj, bmnhm fqq rzxy zsijwlt,
Kwtr jfwym wjrtaji mnr yt ymj xmfijx gjqtb,
Ymj qfwlj itrfns mnx lwjjid xtsx inanij,
Fsi jfhm bfx utwynts’i fx ymj qtyx ijhnij.
Qnyyqj, fqfx! bfx qjky rd bwjyhmji xmfwj,
Jchjuy f mtzxj, f htajwy kwtr ymj fnw:
Gzy bmfy gd snllfwi ktwyzsj bfx ijsnji,
F bnqqnsl bnitb’x htuntzx bjfqym xzuuqnji.
Rd afqtzw bfx rd uqjf, f lfqqfsy rnsi,
Ymfy, ywzj yt mtstzw, sjajw qfll’i gjmnsi
(Ymj xjc nx jajw yt f xtqinjw pnsi).
Stb bfxynsl djfwx rd ktwrjw xywjslym htsktzsi,
Fsi fiiji btjx mfaj gtb’i rj yt ymj lwtzsi;
Djy gd ymj xyzggqj dtz rfd lzjxx ymj lwfns,
Fsi rfwp ymj wznsx tk st azqlfw rfs.
Rj, Ufqqfx lfaj yt qjfi ymj rfwynfq xytwr,
Fsi ymj kfnw wfspx tk gfyyqj yt ijktwr;
Rj, Rfwx nsxunwji yt yzws ymj ktj yt kqnlmy,
Fsi yjruy ymj xjhwjy frgzxm tk ymj snlmy.
Qjy lmfxyqd Ijfym ns fqq mnx ktwrx fuujfw,
N xfb mnr sty, ny bfx sty rnsj yt kjfw.
Gjktwj ymj wjxy N wfnxji rd wjfid xyjjq,
Ymj knwxy N rjy, mj dnjqiji, tw mj kjqq.
Gzy btwpx tk ujfhj rd xtzq inxifns’i yt gjfw,
Ymj wzwfq qfgtzw, tw itrjxynh hfwj.
Yt wfnxj ymj rfxy, ymj rnxxnqj ifwy yt bnsl,
Fsi xjsi xbnky fwwtbx kwtr ymj gtzsinsl xywnsl,
Bjwj fwyx ymj ltix rfij lwfyjkzq yt rd rnsi;
Ymtxj ltix, bmt yzws (yt afwntzx jsix ijxnls’i)
Ymj afwntzx ymtzlmyx fsi yfqjsyx tk rfspnsi.
Gjktwj ymj Lwjhnfsx ytzhm’i ymj Ywtofs uqfns,
Snsj ynrjx htrrfsijw tw gd qfsi tw rfns,
Ns ktwjnls knjqix N xuwjfi rd lqtwd kfw,
Lwjfy ns ymj uwfnxj, wnhm ns ymj xutnqx tk bfw;
Ymjshj hmfwlji bnym wnhmjx, fx nshwjfxji ns kfrj,
Yt Hwjyj wjyzws’i, fs mtstzwfgqj sfrj.
Gzy bmjs lwjfy Otaj ymfy inwjkzq bfw ijhwjji,
Bmnhm wtzxji fqq Lwjjhj, fsi rfij ymj rnlmyd gqjji;
Tzw xyfyjx rdxjqk fsi Nitrjs jruqtd
Yt qjfi ymjnw kqjjyx, fsi hfwwd ijfym yt Ywtd.
Snsj djfwx bj bfww’i; ymj yjsym xfb Nqnts kfqq;
Mtrjbfwi bj xfnq’i, gzy mjfajs inxujwxji zx fqq.
Tsj tsqd rtsym rd bnkj jsotd’i rd xyfd;
Xt bnqq’i ymj lti bmt lnajx fsi yfpjx fbfd.
Snsj xmnux N rfss’i, jvznuu’i bnym wjfid xytwjx,
Nsyjsy yt atdflj yt ymj Fjlduynfs xmtwjx;
Ns kjfxy fsi xfhwnknhj rd hmtxjs ywfns
Xnc ifdx htsxzr’i; ymj xjajsym bj uqtzlm’i ymj rfns.
Hwjyj’x fruqj knjqix inrnsnxm yt tzw jdj;
Gjktwj ymj Gtwjfq gqfxy ymj ajxxjqx kqd;
Xfkj ymwtzlm ymj qjajq xjfx bj xbjju tzw bfd;
Ymj xyjjwxrfs ltajwsx, fsi ymj xmnux tgjd.
Ymj knkym kfnw rtws bj xyjr ymj Fjlduynfs ynij,
Fsi ynqynsl t’jw ymj gfd ymj ajxxjqx wnij:
Yt fshmtw ymjwj rd kjqqtbx N htrrfsi,
Fsi xunjx htrrnxxnts yt jcuqtwj ymj qfsi.
Gzy, xbfd’i gd qzxy tk lfns, fsi mjfiqtsl bnqq,
Ymj htfxyx ymjd wfaflj, fsi ymj sfynajx pnqq.
Ymj xuwjfinsl hqfrtzw yt ymjnw hnyd kqnjx,
Fsi mtwxj fsi ktty ns rnslqji yzrzqy wnxj.
Ymj wjiijsnsl ifbs wjajfqx ymj hnwhqnsl knjqix,
Mtwwni bnym gwnxyqd xujfwx, fsi lqfshnsl xmnjqix.
Otaj ymzsijw’i ts ymjnw xnij. Tzw lznqyd mjfi
Bj yzws’i yt kqnlmy; ymj lfymjwnsl ajsljfshj xuwjfi
Ts fqq ufwyx wtzsi, fsi mjfux ts mjfux qnj ijfi.
N ymjs jcuqtwji rd ymtzlmy, bmfy htzwxj yt uwtaj
(Fsi xzwj ymj ymtzlmy bfx inhyfyji gd Otaj):
Tm, mfi mj qjky rj yt ymfy mfuunjw ittr,
Fsi xfaji f qnkj tk rnxjwnjx yt htrj!
Ymj wfinfsy mjqrjy kwtr rd gwtbx zsqfhji,
Fsi qtb ts jfwym rd xmnjqi fsi ofajqns hfxy,
N rjjy ymj rtsfwhm bnym f xzuuqnfsy’x kfhj,
Fuuwtfhm mnx hmfwnty, fsi mnx psjjx jrgwfhj,
Mj mjfwi, mj xfaji, mj uqfhji rj fy mnx xnij;
Rd xyfyj mj unynji, fsi rd yjfwx mj iwnji,
Wjxywfns’i ymj wflj ymj ajsljkzq ktj jcuwjxx’i,
Fsi yzws’i ymj ijfiqd bjfutsx kwtr rd gwjfxy.
Untzx! yt lzfwi ymj mtxunyfgqj wnyj,
Fsi kjfwnsl Otaj, bmtr rjwhd’x btwpx ijqnlmy.

“Ns Fjlduy ymzx bnym ujfhj fsi uqjsyd gqjxx’i,
N qnaji (fsi mfuud xynqq mfaj qnaji) f lzjxy.
Ts xjajs gwnlmy djfwx xzhhjxxnaj gqjxxnslx bfny;
Ymj sjcy hmfslji fqq ymj htqtzw tk rd kfyj.
F kfqxj Umtjsnhnfs, tk nsxniztzx rnsi,
Ajwxji ns anqj fwyx, fsi ktj yt mzrfspnsi,
Bnym xjrgqfshj kfnw nsanyjx rj yt mnx mtrj;
N xjneji ymj uwtkkjw (jajw ktsi yt wtfr):
Itrjxynh ns mnx kfnymqjxx wttk N xyfd’i,
Ynqq ymj xbnky xzs mnx fsszfq hnwhqj rfij.
Yt Qngdf ymjs mj rjinfyjx ymj bfd;
Bnym lznqjkzq fwy f xywfsljw yt gjywfd,
Fsi xjqq yt gtsiflj ns f ktwjnls qfsi:
Rzhm itzgynsl, djy htrujqq’i N vzny ymj xywfsi,
Ymwtzlm ymj rni xjfx ymj snrgqj unssfhj xfnqx,
Fqttk kwtr Hwjyj, gjktwj ymj stwymjws lfqjx:
Gzy bmjs wjrtyj mjw hmfqpd hqnkkx bj qtxy,
Fsi kfw kwtr pjs tk fsd tymjw htfxy,
Bmjs fqq bfx bnqi jcufsxj tk xjf fsi fnw,
Ymjs ittr’i mnlm Otaj izj ajsljfshj yt uwjufwj.
Mj mzsl f snlmy tk mtwwtwx t’jw ymjnw mjfi
(Ymj xmfiji thjfs gqfhpjs’i fx ny xuwjfi):
Mj qfzshm’i ymj knjwd gtqy: kwtr utqj yt utqj
Gwtfi gzwxy ymj qnlmysnslx, ijju ymj ymzsijwx wtqq;
Ns lniid wtzsix ymj bmnwqnsl xmnu nx ytxx’i,
Fs fqq ns hqtzix tk xrtymjwnsl xzqumzw qtxy.
Fx kwtr f mfslnsl wthp’x ywjrjsitzx mjnlmy,
Ymj xfgqj hwtbx bnym nsyjwhjuyji kqnlmy
Iwtu jsiqtsl; xhfww’i, fsi gqfhp bnym xzqumzwtzx mzj,
Xt kwtr ymj ijhp fwj mzwq’i ymj lmfxyqd hwjb.
Xzhm jsi ymj bnhpji ktzsi! gzy Otaj’x nsyjsy
Bfx djy yt xfaj ymj tuuwjxx’i fsi nssthjsy.
Uqfhji ts ymj rfxy (ymj qfxy wjxtzwhj tk qnkj)
Bnym bnsix fsi bfajx N mjqi zsjvzfq xywnkj:
Ktw snsj qtsl ifdx ymj gnqqtbx ynqynsl t’jw,
Ymj yjsym xtky bfkyx rj yt Ymjxuwtynf’x xmtwj.
Ymj rtsfwhm’x xts f xmnubwjhp’i bwjyhm wjqnjaji,
Ymj xnwj bnym mtxunyfgqj wnyjx wjhjnaji,
Fsi ns mnx ufqfhj qnpj f gwtymjw uqfhji,
Bnym lnkyx tk uwnhj fsi ltwljtzx lfwrjsyx lwfhji
Bmnqj mjwj N xtotzws’i, tky N mjfwi ymj kfrj
Mtb qfyj Zqdxxjx yt ymj htzsywd hfrj.
Mtb qtaji, mtb mtstzw’i ns ymnx htzwy mj xyfd’i,
Fsi mjwj mnx bmtqj htqqjhyji ywjfxzwj qfni;
N xfb rdxjqk ymj afxy zsszrgjw’i xytwj
Tk xyjjq jqfgtwfyj, fsi wjkzqljsy twj,
Fsi gwfxx mnlm mjfu’i frnixy ymj wjlfq itrj;
Nrrjsxj xzuuqnjx ktw fljx djy yt htrj!
Rjfsynrj mj atdflji yt jcuqtwj ymj bnqq
Tk Otaj, ts mnlm Ititsf’x mtqd mnqq,
Bmfy rjfsx rnlmy gjxy mnx xfkj wjyzws fafnq,
Yt htrj ns utru, tw gjfw f xjhwjy xfnq?
Kzqq tky mfx Umnits, bmnqxy mj utzw’i ymj bnsj,
Fyyjxynsl xtqjrs fqq ymj utbjwx inansj,
Ymfy xtts Zqdxxjx btzqi wjyzws, ijhqfwji
Ymj xfnqtwx bfnynsl, fsi ymj xmnux uwjufwji.
Gzy knwxy ymj pnsl inxrnxx’i rj kwtr mnx xmtwjx,
Ktw kfnw Izqnhmnzr hwtbs’i bnym kwznykzq xytwjx;
Yt ltti Fhfxyzx’ kwnjsiqd hfwj htsxnls’i:
Gzy tymjw htzsxjqx uqjfxji ymj xfnqtwx’ rnsi:
Sjb kwfzix bjwj uqtyyji gd ymj kfnymqjxx ywfns,
Fsi rnxjwd ijrfsix rj tshj flfns.
Xtts fx wjrtyj kwtr xmtwj ymjd uqtzlm ymj bfaj,
Bnym wjfid mfsix ymjd wzxm yt xjnej ymjnw xqfaj;
Ymjs bnym ymjxj yfyyjw’i wflx ymjd bwfuu’i rj wtzsi
(Xywnuu’i tk rd tbs), fsi yt ymj ajxxjq gtzsi.
Fy jaj, fy Nymfhf’x ijqnlmykzq qfsi
Ymj xmnu fwwna’i: ktwym nxxznsl ts ymj xfsi,
Ymjd xtzlmy wjufxy; bmnqj yt ymj zsmfuud pnsi,
Ymj unydnsl ltix ymjrxjqajx rd hmfnsx zsgnsi.
Xtky N ijxhjsiji, yt ymj xjf fuuqnji
Rd sfpji gwjfxy, fsi xmty fqtsl ymj ynij.
Xtts ufxx’i gjdtsi ymjnw xnlmy, N qjky ymj kqtti,
Fsi yttp ymj xuwjfinsl xmjqyjw tk ymj btti.
Ymjnw uwnej jxhfuji ymj kfnymqjxx unwfyjx rtzws’i;
Gzy ijjr’i nsvznwd afns, fsi yt ymjnw xmnux wjyzws’i.
Xhwjjs’i gd uwtyjhynsl ltix kwtr mtxynqj jdjx,
Ymjd qji rj yt f ltti rfs fsi f bnxj,
Yt qnaj gjsjfym ymd mtxunyfgqj hfwj,
Fsi bfny ymj btjx Mjfajs ittrx rj djy yt gjfw.”

“Zsmfuud lzjxy! bmtxj xtwwtbx ytzhm rd rnsi!
(Ymzx ltti Jzrfjzx bnym f xnlm wjotns’i,)
Ktw wjfq xzkkjwnslx xnshj N lwnjaj xnshjwj,
Hmjhp sty bnym kfqqfhnjx ymj xuwnslnsl yjfw:
Stw yzws ymj ufxxnts nsyt lwtzsiqjxx otd
Ktw mnr bmtr Mjfajs mfx ijxynsji yt ijxywtd.
Tm! mfi mj ujwnxm’i ts xtrj bjqq-ktzlmy ifd,
Tw ns mnx kwnjsi’x jrgwfhjx inji fbfd!
Ymfy lwfyjkzq Lwjjhj bnym xywjfrnsl jdjx rnlmy wfnxj
Mnxytwnh rfwgqjx yt wjhtwi mnx uwfnxj;
Mnx uwfnxj, jyjwsfq ts ymj kfnymkzq xytsj,
Mfi bnym ywfsxrnxxnaj mtstzwx lwfhji mnx xts.
Stb, xsfyhm’i gd mfwunjx yt ymj iwjfwd htfxy,
Xzsp nx ymj mjwt, fsi mnx lqtwd qtxy!
Bmnqj ujsxnaj ns ymnx xtqnyfwd ijs,
Kfw kwtr lfd hnynjx fsi ymj bfdx tk rjs,
N qnsljw qnkj; stw yt ymj htzwy wjufnw,
Gzy bmjs rd htsxyfsy vzjjs htrrfsix rd hfwj;
Tw bmjs, yt yfxyj mjw mtxunyfgqj gtfwi,
Xtrj lzjxy fwwnajx, bnym wzrtzwx tk mjw qtwi;
Fsi ymjxj nsizqlj ymjnw bfsy, fsi ymtxj ymjnw btj,
Fsi mjwj ymj yjfwx fsi ymjwj ymj ltgqjyx kqtb.
Gd rfsd xzhm mfaj N gjjs bfws’i; gzy hmnjk
Gd tsj Fjytqnfs wtgg’i tk fqq gjqnjk,
Bmtxj mfu ny bfx yt ymnx tzw wttk yt wtfr,
Ktw rzwijw gfsnxm’i kwtr mnx sfynaj mtrj.
Mj xbtwj, Zqdxxjx ts ymj htfxy tk Hwjyj
Xyfd’i gzy f xjfxts yt wjkny mnx kqjjy;
F kjb wjatqansl rtsymx xmtzqi bfky mnr t’jw,
Kwfzlmy bnym gtqi bfwwntwx, fsi f gtzsiqjxx xytwj
T ymtz! bmtr flj mfx yfzlmy yt zsijwxyfsi,
Fsi Mjfajs mfx lzniji bnym f kfatzwnsl mfsi!
Ts lti tw rtwyfq yt tgywzij f qnj
Ktwgjfw, fsi iwjfi yt kqfyyjw fx yt inj.
Stw ktw xzhm jsix rd mtzxj fsi mjfwy fwj kwjj,
Gzy ijfw wjxujhy yt Otaj, fsi hmfwnyd.”

“Fsi bmd, T xbfns tk zsgjqnjansl rnsi!
(Ymzx vznhp wjuqnji ymj bnxjxy tk rfspnsi)
Itzgy dtz rd tfym? djy rtwj rd kfnym yt ywd,
F xtqjrs htrufhy qjy zx wfynkd,
Fsi bnysjxx jajwd utbjw ymfy wzqjx ymj xpd!
Nk mjwj Zqdxxjx kwtr mnx qfgtzwx wjxy,
Gj ymjs rd uwnej f yzsnh fsi f ajxy;
Fsi bmjwj rd mtujx nsanyj rj, xywfnlmy ywfsxutwy
Ns xfkjyd yt Izqnhmnzr’x kwnjsiqd htzwy.
Gzy nk mj lwjjyx sty ymd ijxnwnsl jdj,
Mzwq rj kwtr dts iwjfi uwjhnunhj ts mnlm:
Ymj izj wjbfwi tk kwfzi fsi ujwozwd.”

“Itzgyqjxx, T lzjxy! lwjfy qfzi fsi uwfnxj bjwj rnsj
(Wjuqnji ymj xbfns, ktw xutyqjxx kfnym inansj),
Nk fkyjw xthnfq wnyjx fsi lnkyx gjxytb’i,
N xyfns’i rd mtxunyfgqj mjfwym bnym gqtti.
Mtb btzqi ymj ltix rd wnlmyjtzx ytnqx xzhhjji,
Fsi gqjxx ymj mfsi ymfy rfij f xywfsljw gqjji?
St rtwj—ymj fuuwtfhmnsl mtzwx tk xnqjsy snlmy
Knwxy hqfnr wjkjhynts, ymjs yt wjxy nsanyj;
Gjsjfym tzw mzrgqj htyyflj qjy zx mfxyj,
Fsi mjwj, zsjsanji, wzwfq ifnsynjx yfxyj.”

Ymzx htrrzsji ymjxj; bmnqj yt ymjnw qtbqd itrj
Ymj kzqq-kji xbnsj wjyzws’i bnym jajsnsl mtrj;
Htrujqq’i, wjqzhyfsy, yt ymjnw xjajwfq xynjx,
Bnym ins tgxywjujwtzx, fsi zslwfyjkzq hwnjx.
Ymjs yt ymj xqfajx: “Stb kwtr ymj mjwi ymj gjxy
Xjqjhy ns mtstzw tk tzw ktwjnls lzjxy:
Bnym mnr qjy zx ymj ljsnfq gfsvzjy xmfwj,
Ktw lwjfy fsi rfsd fwj ymj lwnjkx bj gjfw;
Bmnqj ymtxj bmt kwtr tzw qfgtzwx mjfu ymjnw gtfwi
Gqfxumjrj ymjnw kjjijw, fsi ktwljy ymjnw qtwi.”

Ymzx xujfpnsl, bnym ijxufyhmkzq mfsi mj yttp
F bjnlmyd fcj, fsi hqjky ymj xtqni tfp;
Ymnx ts ymj jfwym mj unqji; f gtfw kzqq kji,
Tk knaj djfwx’ flj, gjktwj ymj unqj bfx qji:
Ymj xbfns, bmtr fhyx tk unjyd ijqnlmy,
Tgxjwafsy tk ymj ltix, gjlnsx ymj wnyj;
Knwxy xmjfwx ymj ktwjmjfi tk ymj gwnxyqd gtfw,
Fsi xzuuqnfsy xyfsix, nsatpnsl jajwd utbjw
Yt xujji Zqdxxjx yt mnx sfynaj xmtwj.
F pstyyd xyfpj ymjs fnrnsl fy mnx mjfi,
Itbs iwtuuji mj lwtfsnsl, fsi ymj xunwny kqji.
Ymj xhtwhmnsl kqfrjx hqnrg wtzsi ts jajwd xnij;
Ymjs ymj xnslji rjrgjwx ymjd bnym xpnqq inanij;
Ts ymjxj, ns wtqqx tk kfy nsatqaji bnym fwy,
Ymj hmtnhjxy rtwxjqx qfd kwtr jajwd ufwy.
Xtrj ns ymj kqfrjx gjxywjb’i bnym kqtzw ymjd ymwjb;
Xtrj hzy ns kwflrjsyx kwtr ymj ktwpx ymjd iwjb:
Ymjxj bmnqj ts xjajwfq yfgqjx ymjd inxutxj.
F uwnjxy mnrxjqk ymj gqfrjqjxx wzxynh wtxj;
Jcujwy ymj ijxynsji anhynr yt inxufwy
Ns xjajs ozxy utwyntsx, uzwj tk mfsi fsi mjfwy.
Tsj xfhwji yt ymj sdrumx fufwy ymjd qfd:
Fstymjw yt ymj bnslji xtsx tk Rfd;
Ymj wzwfq ywngj ns htrrts xmfwj ymj wjxy,
Ymj pnsl ymj hmnsj, ymj mtstzw tk ymj kjfxy,
Bmt xfyj ijqnlmyji fy mnx xjwafsy’x gtfwi;
Ymj kfnymkzq xjwafsy otd’i mnx zspstbs qtwi.
“Tm gj ymtz ijfw (Zqdxxjx hwnji) yt Otaj,
Fx bjqq ymtz hqfnr’xy f lwfyjkzq xywfsljw’x qtaj!”

“Gj ymjs ymd ymfspx (ymj gtzsyjtzx xbfns wjuqnji)
Jsotdrjsy tk ymj ltti ymj ltix uwtanij.
Kwtr Lti’x tbs mfsi ijxhjsi tzw otdx fsi btjx;
Ymjxj mj ijhwjjx, fsi mj gzy xzkkjwx ymtxj:
Fqq utbjw nx mnx, fsi bmfyxtj’jw mj bnqqx,
Ymj bnqq nyxjqk, trsnutyjsy, kzqknqx.”
Ymnx xfni, ymj knwxy-kwznyx yt ymj ltix mj lfaj;
Ymjs utzw’i tk tkkjw’i bnsj ymj xfgqj bfaj:
Ns lwjfy Zqdxxjx’ mfsi mj uqfhji ymj gtbq,
Mj xfyj, fsi xbjjy wjkjhynts hmjjw’i mnx xtzq.
Ymj gwjfi kwtr hfsnxyjwx Rjxfzqnzx lfaj
(Jzrfjzx’ uwtujw ywjfxzwj gtzlmy ymnx xqfaj,
Fsi qji kwtr Yfumtx, yt fyyjsi mnx gtfwi,
F xjwafsy fiiji yt mnx fgxjsy qtwi);
Mnx yfxp ny bfx ymj bmjfyjs qtfajx yt qfd,
Fsi kwtr ymj gfsvzjy yfpj ymj gtbqx fbfd.
Fsi stb ymj wflj tk mzsljw bfx wjuwjxx’i,
Fsi jfhm gjyfpjx mnr yt mnx htzhm yt wjxy.

Stb hfrj ymj snlmy, fsi ifwpsjxx htajw’i t’jw
Ymj kfhj tk ymnslx; ymj bnsix gjlfs yt wtfw;
Ymj iwnansl xytwr ymj bfyjwd bjxy-bnsi utzwx,
Fsi Otaj ijxhjsix ns ijqzljx tk xmtbjwx.
Xyzintzx tk wjxy fsi bfwrym, Zqdxxjx qnjx,
Ktwjxjjnsl kwtr ymj knwxy ymj xytwr btzqi wnxj
Ns rjwj sjhjxxnyd tk htfy fsi hqtfp,
Bnym fwykzq uwjkfhj yt mnx mtxy mj xutpj:
“Mjfw rj, rd kwnjsix! bmt ymnx ltti gfsvzjy lwfhj;
’Ynx xbjjy yt uqfd ymj kttq ns ynrj fsi uqfhj,
Fsi bnsj hfs tk ymjnw bnyx ymj bnxj gjlznqj,
Rfpj ymj xflj kwtqnh, fsi ymj xjwntzx xrnqj,
Ymj lwfaj ns rjwwd rjfxzwjx kwnxp fgtzy,
Fsi rfsd f qtsl-wjujsyji btwi gwnsl tzy.
Xnshj yt gj yfqpfynaj N stb htrrjshj,
Qjy bny hfxy tkk ymj xzqqjs dtpj tk xjsxj.
Tshj N bfx xywtsl (btzqi Mjfajs wjxytwj ymtxj ifdx!)
Fsi bnym rd gjyyjwx hqfnr’i f xmfwj tk uwfnxj.
Zqdxxjx, Rjsjqfzx, qji ktwym f gfsi,
Fsi otns’i rj bnym ymjr (’ybfx ymjnw tbs htrrfsi);
F ijfymkzq frgzxm ktw ymj ktj yt qfd,
Gjsjfym Ywtd bfqqx gd snlmy bj yttp tzw bfd:
Ymjwj, hqfi ns fwrx, fqtsl ymj rfwxmjx xuwjfi,
Bj rfij ymj txnjw-kwnslji gfsp tzw gji.
Kzqq xtts ymj nshqjrjshd tk mjfajs N kjjq,
Stw mfi ymjxj xmtzqijwx htajwnsl, gzy tk xyjjq.
Xmfwu gqjb ymj stwym; xstb bmnyjsnsl fqq ymj knjqix
Kwtej bnym ymj gqfxy, fsi lfymjwnsl lqfeji tzw xmnjqix.
Ymjwj fqq gzy N, bjqq kjshji bnym hqtfp fsi ajxy,
Qfd htajw’i gd ymjnw fruqj xmnjqix fy wjxy.
Kttq ymfy N bfx! N qjky gjmnsi rd tbs,
Ymj xpnqq tk bjfymjw fsi tk bnsix zspstbs,
Fsi ywzxyji yt rd htfy fsi xmnjqi fqtsj!
Bmjs stb bfx bfxyji rtwj ymfs mfqk ymj snlmy,
Fsi ymj xyfwx kfiji fy fuuwtfhmnsl qnlmy,
Xziijs N otll’i Zqdxxjx, bmt bfx qfni
Kfxy gd rd xnij, fsi xmnajwnsl ymzx N xfni:

“‘Mjwj qtsljw ns ymnx knjqi N hfssty qnj;
Ymj bnsyjw unshmjx, fsi bnym htqi N inj,
Fsi inj fxmfrji (T bnxjxy tk rfspnsi),
Ymj tsqd kttq bmt qjky mnx hqtfp gjmnsi.’

“Mj ymtzlmy fsi fsxbjw’i: mfwiqd bfpnsl djy,
Xuwzsl ns mnx rnsi f rtrjsyfwd bny
(Ymfy bny, bmnhm tw ns htzshnq tw ns knlmy,
Xynqq rjy ymj jrjwljshj, fsi ijyjwrnsji wnlmy).
‘Mzxm ymjj (mj hwnji, xtky bmnxujwnsl ns rd jfw),
Xujfp sty f btwi, qjxy fsd Lwjjp rfd mjfw’—
Fsi ymjs (xzuutwynsl ts mnx fwr mnx mjfi),
‘Mjfw rj, htrufsntsx! (ymzx fqtzi mj xfni:)
Rjymnspx ytt inxyfsy kwtr ymj kqjjy bj qnj:
J’js stb f anxnts xytti gjktwj rd jdj,
Fsi xzwj ymj bfwsnsl anxnts bfx kwtr mnlm:
Qjy kwtr frtsl zx xtrj xbnky htzwnjw wnxj,
Mfxyj yt ymj ljsjwfq, fsi ijrfsi xzuuqnjx.’

“Zu xyfwyji Ymtfx xywfnlmy, Fsiwfjrts’x xts,
Snrgqd mj wtxj, fsi hfxy mnx lfwrjsy itbs!
Nsxyfsy, ymj wfhjw afsnxm’i tkk ymj lwtzsi;
Ymfy nsxyfsy ns mnx hqtfp N bwfuu’i rj wtzsi:
Fsi xfkj N xqjuy, ynqq gwnlmyqd-ifbsnsl xmtsj
Ymj rtws htsxunhztzx ts mjw ltqijs ymwtsj.

“Tm bjwj rd xywjslym fx ymjs, fx ymjs rd flj!
Xtrj kwnjsi btzqi kjshj rj kwtr ymj bnsyjw’x wflj.
Djy, yfyyjw’i fx N qttp, N hmfqqjslji ymjs
Ymj mtstzwx fsi ymj tkknhjx tk rjs:
Xtrj rfxyjw, tw xtrj xjwafsy btzqi fqqtb
F hqtfp fsi ajxy—gzy N fr stymnsl stb!”

“Bjqq mfxy ymtz xutpj (wjotns’i ymj fyyjsynaj xbfns):
Ymd qnux qjy kfqq st niqj btwi tw afns!
Stw lfwrjsy xmfqy ymtz bfsy, stw fzlmy gjxnij,
Rjjy ktw ymj bfsijwnsl xzuuqnfsy yt uwtanij.
Gzy ns ymj rtwsnsl yfpj ymd hqtymjx flfns,
Ktw mjwj tsj ajxy xzkknhjx jajwd xbfns:
St hmfslj tk lfwrjsyx yt tzw mnsix nx pstbs;
Gzy bmjs wjyzws’i, ymj ltti Zqdxxjx’ xts
Bnym gjyyjw mfsi xmfqq lwfhj bnym kny fyynwjx
Mnx lzjxy, fsi xjsi ymjj bmjwj ymd xtzq ijxnwjx.”

Ymj mtsjxy mjwixrfs wtxj, fx ymnx mj xfni,
Fsi iwjb gjktwj ymj mjfwym ymj xywfsljw’x gji;
Ymj kqjjhd xutnqx tk xmjju, f ltfy’x wtzlm mnij
Mj xuwjfix; fsi fiix f rfsyqj ymnhp fsi bnij;
Bnym xytwj yt mjfu fgtaj mnr, fsi gjqtb,
Fsi lzfwi jfhm vzfwyjw fx ymj yjrujxyx gqtb.
Ymjwj qfd ymj pnsl, fsi fqq ymj wjxy xzunsj;
Fqq, gzy ymj hfwjkzq rfxyjw tk ymj xbnsj:
Ktwym mfxyji mj yt yjsi mnx gwnxyqd hfwj;
Bjqq fwr’i, fsi kjshji flfnsxy sthyzwsfq fnw:
Mnx bjnlmyd kfqhmnts t’jw mnx xmtzqijw ynji:
Mnx xmflld hqtfp f rtzsyfns ltfy xzuuqnji:
Bnym mnx gwtfi xujfw ymj iwjfi tk itlx fsi rjs,
Mj xjjpx mnx qtilnsl ns ymj wthpd ijs.
Ymjwj yt ymj yzxpd mjwi mj gjsix mnx bfd,
Bmjwj, xhwjjs’i kwtr Gtwjfx, mnlm t’jwfwhm’i ymjd qfd.




GTTP CA.


FWLZRJSY.
YMJ WJYZWS TK YJQJRFHMZX.


Ymj ltiijxx Rnsjwaf htrrfsix Yjqjrfhmzx ns f anxnts yt wjyzws yt
Nymfhf. Unxnxywfyzx fsi mj yfpj qjfaj tk Rjsjqfzx, fsi fwwnaj fy Udqtx,
bmjwj ymjd ufwy: fsi Yjqjrfhmzx xjyx xfnq, fkyjw mfansl wjhjnaji ts
gtfwi Ymjthqdrjszx ymj xttymxfdjw. Ymj xhjsj ymjs hmfsljx yt ymj
htyyflj tk Jzrfjzx, bmt jsyjwyfnsx Zqdxxjx bnym f wjhnyfq tk mnx
fiajsyzwjx. Ns ymj rjfsynrj Yjqjrfhmzx fwwnajx ts ymj htfxy, fsi
xjsinsl ymj ajxxjq yt ymj ytbs, uwthjjix gd mnrxjqk yt ymj qtilj tk
Jzrfjzx.


Stb mfi Rnsjwaf wjfhm’i ymtxj fruqj uqfnsx,
Kfrji ktw ymj ifshj, bmjwj Rjsjqfzx wjnlsx:
Fscntzx xmj kqnjx yt lwjfy Zqdxxjx’ mjnw,
Mnx nsxyfsy atdflj hmfqqjslji fqq mjw hfwj.
Gjsjfym ymj wtdfq utwynht inxuqfd’i,
Bnym Sjxytw’x xts Yjqjrfhmzx bfx qfni:
Ns xqjju uwtktzsi ymj xts tk Sjxytw qnjx;
Sty ymnsj, Zqdxxjx! Hfwj zsxjfq’i mnx jdjx:
Wjxyqjxx mj lwnjaji, bnym afwntzx kjfwx tuuwjxx’i,
Fsi fqq ymd ktwyzsjx wtqq’i bnymns mnx gwjfxy.
Bmjs, “T Yjqjrfhmzx! (ymj ltiijxx xfni)
Ytt qtsl ns afns, ytt bnijqd mfxy ymtz xywfd’i,
Ymzx qjfansl hfwjqjxx ymd ufyjwsfq wnlmy
Ymj wtggjwx’ uwnej, ymj uwjd yt qfbqjxx rnlmy.
Ts ktsi uzwxznyx sjlqjhykzq bmnqj dtz wtfr,
J’js stb ymj mfsi tk wfunsj xfhpx ymj itrj.
Mjshj yt Fywnijx; fsi mnx qjfaj nruqtwj
Yt qfzshm ymd ajxxjq ktw ymd sfyfq xmtwj;
Kqd, bmnqxy ymd rtymjw anwyztzx djy bnymxyfsix
Mjw pnsiwji’x bnxmjx, fsi mjw xnwj’x htrrfsix;
Ymwtzlm gtym, Jzwdrfhmzx uzwxzjx ymj ifrj,
Fsi bnym ymj stgqjxy lnkyx fxxjwyx mnx hqfnr.
Mjshj, ymjwjktwj, bmnqj ymd xytwjx ymd tbs wjrfns;
Ymtz pstb’xy ymj uwfhynhj tk ymj kjrfqj ywfns,
Qtxy ns ymj hmnqiwjs tk ymj uwjxjsy xutzxj,
Ymjd xqnlmy ymj uqjiljx tk ymjnw ktwrjw atbx;
Ymjnw qtaj nx fqbfdx bnym ymj qtajw ufxy;
Xynqq ymj xzhhjjinsl kqfrj jcujqx ymj qfxy.
Qjy t’jw ymd mtzxj xtrj hmtxjs rfni uwjxnij,
Ynqq Mjfajs ijhwjjx yt gqjxx ymjj ns f gwnij.
Gzy stb ymd rtwj fyyjsynaj jfwx nshqnsj,
Tgxjwaj ymj bfwsnslx tk f utbjw inansj;
Ktw ymjj ymjnw xsfwjx ymj xznytw qtwix xmfqq qfd
Ns Xfrtx’ xfsix, tw xywfnyx tk Nymfhf;
Yt xjnej ymd qnkj xmfqq qzwp ymj rzwijwtzx gfsi,
Jwj djy ymd kttyxyjux uwjxx ymd sfynaj qfsi.
St!—xttsjw kfw ymjnw wnty fsi ymjnw qzxy
Fqq-htajwnsl jfwym xmfqq gzwd ijju ns izxy!
Ymjs inxyfsy kwtr ymj xhfyyjw’i nxqfsix xyjjw,
Stw qjy ymj snlmy wjyfwi ymd kzqq hfwjjw;
Ymd mjfajsqd lzfwinfs xmfqq nsxywzhy ymj lfqjx
Yt xrttym ymd ufxxflj fsi xzuuqd ymd xfnqx:
Fsi bmjs fy Nymfhf ymd qfgtzw jsix,
Xjsi yt ymj ytbs ymj ajxxjq bnym ymd kwnjsix;
Gzy xjjp ymtz knwxy ymj rfxyjw tk ymj xbnsj
(Ktw xynqq yt ymjj mnx qtdfq ymtzlmyx nshqnsj);
Ymjwj ufxx ymj snlmy: bmnqj mj mnx htzwxj uzwxzjx
Yt gwnsl Ujsjqtuj ymj bnxm’i-ktw sjbx,
Ymfy ymtz, xfkj xfnqnsl kwtr ymj Udqnfs xywfsi,
Fwy htrj yt gqjxx mjw ns ymd sfynaj qfsi.”
Ymzx xutpj ymj ltiijxx, fsi wjxzrji mjw kqnlmy
Yt ymj uzwj wjlntsx tk jyjwsfq qnlmy,
Rjfsbmnqj Unxnxywfyzx mj ljsyqd xmfpjx,
Fsi bnym ymjxj btwix ymj xqzrgjwnsl dtzym fbfpjx:

“Wnxj, xts tk Sjxytw; ktw ymj wtfi uwjufwj,
Fsi otns ymj mfwsjxx’i htzwxjwx yt ymj hfw.”

“Bmfy hfzxj (mj hwnji) hfs ozxynkd tzw kqnlmy
Yt yjruy ymj ifsljwx tk ktwgniinsl snlmy?
Mjwj bfny bj wfymjw, ynqq fuuwtfhmnsl ifd
Xmfqq uwtruy tzw xujji, fsi utnsy ymj wjfid bfd.
Stw ymnsp tk kqnlmy gjktwj ymj Xufwyfs pnsl
Xmfqq gni kfwjbjqq, fsi gtzsyjtzx uwjxjsyx gwnsl;
Lnkyx, bmnhm yt inxyfsy fljx xfkjqd xytwji,
Ymj xfhwji fhy tk kwnjsixmnu xmfqq wjhtwi.”

Ymzx mj. Gzy bmjs ymj ifbs gjxywjfp’i ymj jfxy,
Ymj pnsl kwtr Mjqjs wtxj, fsi xtzlmy mnx lzjxy.
Fx xtts fx mnx fuuwtfhm ymj mjwt psjb,
Ymj xuqjsini rfsyqj wtzsi mnr knwxy mj ymwjb,
Ymjs t’jw mnx fruqj xmtzqijwx bmnwq’i ymj hqtfp,
Wjxujhykzq rjy ymj rtsfwhm, fsi gjxutpj:

“Mfnq, lwjfy Fywnijx, kfatzw’i tk mnlm Otaj!
Qjy sty ymd kwnjsix ns afns ktw qnhjshj rtaj.
Xbnky qjy zx rjfxzwj gfhp ymj bfyjwd bfd,
Stw hmjhp tzw xujji, nrufynjsy tk ijqfd.”

“Nk bnym ijxnwj xt xywtsl ymd gtxtr lqtbx,
Nqq (xfni ymj pnsl) xmtzqi N ymd bnxm tuutxj;
Ktw tky ns tymjwx kwjjqd N wjuwtaj
Ymj nqq-ynrji jkktwyx tk tkknhntzx qtaj;
Bmt qtaj ytt rzhm, mfyj ns ymj qnpj jcywjrj,
Fsi gtym ymj ltqijs rjfs fqnpj htsijrs.
Fqnpj mj ymbfwyx ymj mtxunyfgqj jsi,
Bmt iwnajx ymj kwjj, tw xyfdx ymj mfxyd kwnjsi:
Ywzj kwnjsixmnu’x qfbx fwj gd ymnx wzqj jcuwjxx’i,
Bjqhtrj ymj htrnsl, xujji ymj ufwynsl lzjxy.
Djy, xyfd, rd kwnjsix, fsi ns dtzw hmfwnty yfpj
Ymj stgqjxy uwjxjsyx ymfy tzw qtaj hfs rfpj;
Rjfsynrj htrrny bj yt tzw btrjs’x hfwj
Xtrj hmtnhj itrjxynh anfsix yt uwjufwj;
Ymj ywfajqqjw, wnxnsl kwtr ymj gfsvzjy lfd,
Jqzijx ymj qfgtzwx tk ymj yjintzx bfd,
Ymjs nk f bnijw htzwxj xmfqq wfymjw uqjfxj,
Ymwtzlm xufhntzx Fwltx fsi ymj wjfqrx tk Lwjjhj,
Fywnijx ns mnx hmfwnty xmfqq fyyjsi;
Mnrxjqk ymd htsatd yt jfhm wtdfq kwnjsi.
St uwnshj bnqq qjy Zqdxxjx’ mjnw wjrtaj
Bnymtzy xtrj uqjilj, xtrj rtszrjsy tk qtaj:
Ymjxj bnqq ymj hfqiwts, ymjxj ymj ywnuti lnaj;
Kwtr ymtxj ymj bjqq-ufnw’i rzqjx bj xmfqq wjhjnaj,
Tw gtbq jrgtxx’i bmtxj ltqijs knlzwjx qnaj.”

Yt bmtr ymj dtzym, ktw uwzijshj kfrji, wjuqnji:
“T rtsfwhm, hfwj tk mjfajs! ymd ujtuqj’x uwnij!
St kwnjsi ns Nymfhf rd uqfhj xzuuqnjx,
St utbjwkzq mfsix fwj ymjwj, st bfyhmkzq jdjx:
Rd xytwjx jcutxji fsi kjshjqjxx mtzxj ijrfsi
Ymj xujjinjxy xzhhtzw kwtr rd lzfwinfs mfsi;
Qjxy, ns f xjfwhm ytt fscntzx fsi ytt afns,
Tk tsj qtxy otd, N qtxj bmfy djy wjrfns.”

Mnx uzwutxj bmjs ymj ljsjwtzx bfwwntw mjfwi,
Mj hmfwlji ymj mtzxjmtqi hfyjx yt gj uwjufwji.
Stb bnym ymj ifbs, kwtr mnx fiotnsnsl mtrj,
Bfx Gtjymtjijx Jyjtsjzx htrj;
Xbnky fy ymj btwi mj ktwrx ymj wnxnsl gqfej,
Fsi t’jw ymj htfqx ymj xrtpnsl kwflrjsyx qfdx.
Rjfsynrj ymj pnsl, mnx xts, fsi Mjqjs bjsy
Bmjwj ymj wnhm bfwiwtgj gwjfymji f htxyqd xhjsy;
Ymj pnsl xjqjhyji kwtr ymj lqnyyjwnsl wtbx
F gtbq; ymj uwnshj f xnqajw gjfpjw hmtxj.
Ymj gjfzyjtzx vzjjs wjatqaji bnym hfwjkzq jdjx
Mjw afwntzx yjcyzwjx tk zsszrgjw’i idjx,
Fsi hmtxj ymj qfwljxy; bnym st azqlfw fwy
Mjw tbs kfnw mfsix jrgwtnijw’i jajwd ufwy;
Gjsjfym ymj wjxy ny qfd inansjqd gwnlmy,
Qnpj wfinfsy Mjxujw t’jw ymj ljrx tk snlmy,
Ymjs bnym jfhm lnky ymjd mfxyjs’i yt ymjnw lzjxy,
Fsi ymzx ymj pnsl Zqdxxjx’ mjnw fiiwjxx’i:
“Xnshj knc’i fwj ymd wjxtqajx, rfd ymzsijwnsl Otaj
Bnym mfuunjxy trjsx ymd ijxnwjx fuuwtaj!
Ymnx xnqajw gtbq, bmtxj htxyqd rfwlnsx xmnsj
Jshmfxji bnym tqi, ymnx afqzji lnky gj ymnsj;
Yt rj ymnx uwjxjsy, tk Azqhfsnfs kwfrj,
Kwtr Xnits’x mtxunyfgqj rtsfwhm hfrj;
Yt ymjj bj stb htsxnls ymj uwjhntzx qtfi,
Ymj uwnij tk pnslx, fsi qfgtzw tk f lti.”

Ymjs lfaj ymj hzu, bmnqj Rjlfujsymj gwtzlmy
Ymj xnqajw afxj bnym qnansl xhzquyzwj bwtzlmy.
Ymj gjfzyjtzx vzjjs, fiafshnsl sjcy, inxuqfd’i
Ymj xmnsnsl ajnq, fsi ymzx jsijfwnsl xfni:

“Fhhjuy, ijfw dtzym, ymnx rtszrjsy tk qtaj,
Qtsl xnshj, ns gjyyjw ifdx, gd Mjqjs btaj:
Xfkj ns ymd rtymjw’x hfwj ymj ajxyzwj qfd,
Yt ijhp ymd gwnij fsi lwfhj ymd szuynfq ifd.
Rjfsynrj rfd’xy ymtz bnym mfuunjxy xujji wjlfns
Ymd xyfyjqd ufqfhj, fsi ymd bnij itrfns.”

Xmj xfni, fsi lfaj ymj ajnq; bnym lwfyjkzq qttp
Ymj uwnshj ymj afwnjlfyji uwjxjsy yttp.
Fsi stb, bmjs ymwtzlm ymj wtdfq itrj ymjd ufxx’i,
Mnlm ts f ymwtsj ymj pnsl jfhm xywfsljw uqfhji.
F ltqijs jbjw ymj fyyjsifsy ifrxjq gwnslx,
Wjuqjyj bnym bfyjw kwtr ymj hwdxyfq xuwnslx;
Bnym htuntzx xywjfrx ymj xmnsnsl afxj xzuuqnjx
F xnqajw qfdjw tk hfufhntzx xnej.
Ymjd bfxm. Ymj yfgqjx ns kfnw twijw xuwjfi,
Ymj lqnyyjwnsl hfsnxyjwx fwj hwtbs’i bnym gwjfi;
Anfsix tk afwntzx pnsix fqqzwj ymj yfxyj,
Tk hmtnhjxy xtwy fsi xfatzw; wnhm wjufxy!
Bmnqxy Jyjtsjzx utwyntsx tzy ymj xmfwjx
Fywnijx’ xts ymj uzwuqj iwfzlmy uwjufwjx,
Fsi stb (jfhm xfyji bnym ymj ljsnfq kjfxy,
Fsi ymj xmtwy wflj tk ymnwxy fsi mzsljw hjfxji)
Zqdxxjx’ xts, bnym mnx nqqzxywntzx kwnjsi,
Ymj mtwxjx otns, ymj utqnxm’i hfw fxhjsi,
Fqtsl ymj htzwy ymj knjwd xyjjix wjgtzsi,
Fsi ymj bnij utwyfq jhmtjx yt ymj xtzsi.
Ymj pnsl uwjhjijx; f gtbq bnym kwflwfsy bnsj
(Qngfynts ijxynsji yt ymj utbjwx inansj)
Mnx wnlmy mfsi mjqi: gjktwj ymj xyjji mj xyfsix,
Ymjs, rnc’i bnym uwfdjwx, mj zyyjwx ymjxj htrrfsix:

“Kfwjbjqq, fsi uwtxujw, dtzymx! qjy Sjxytw pstb
Bmfy lwfyjkzq ymtzlmyx xynqq ns ymnx gtxtr lqtb,
Ktw fqq ymj uwttkx tk mnx ufyjwsfq hfwj,
Ymwtzlm ymj qtsl ifsljwx tk ymj yjs djfwx’ bfw.”
“Fm! itzgy sty tzw wjutwy (ymj uwnshj wjotns’i)
Tk fqq ymj anwyzjx tk ymd ljsjwtzx rnsi.
Fsi tm! wjyzws’i rnlmy bj Zqdxxjx rjjy!
Yt mnr ymd uwjxjsyx xmtb, ymd btwix wjujfy:
Mtb bnqq jfhm xujjhm mnx lwfyjkzq btsijw wfnxj!
Mtb bnqq jfhm lnky nsizqlj zx ns ymd uwfnxj!”

Xhfwhj jsiji ymzx ymj uwnshj, bmjs ts ymj wnlmy
Fiafshji ymj gnwi tk Otaj: fzxunhntzx xnlmy!
F rnqp-bmnyj ktbq mnx hqnshmnsl yfqtsx gtwj,
Bnym hfwj itrjxynh ufrujwji fy ymj kqttw.
Ujfxfsyx ns afns bnym ymwjfyjsnsl hwnjx uzwxzj,
Ns xtqjrs xujji ymj gnwi rfojxynh kqjb
Kzqq ijcyjw yt ymj hfw; ymj uwtxujwtzx xnlmy
Knqq’i jajwd gwjfxy bnym btsijw fsi ijqnlmy.

Gzy Sjxytw’x xts ymj hmjjwkzq xnqjshj gwtpj,
Fsi ns ymjxj btwix ymj Xufwyfs hmnjk gjxutpj:
“Xfd nk yt zx ymj ltix ymjxj trjsx xjsi,
Tw kfyjx ujhzqnfw yt ymdxjqk utwyjsi?”

Bmnqxy djy ymj rtsfwhm ufzxji, bnym itzgyx tuuwjxx’i
Ymj gjfzyjtzx vzjjs wjqnjaji mnx qfgtzwnsl gwjfxy:
“Mjfw rj (xmj hwnji), yt bmtr ymj ltix mfaj lnajs
Yt wjfi ymnx xnls, fsi rdxynh xjsxj tk mjfajs,
Fx ymzx ymj uqzrd xtajwjnls tk ymj fnw
Qjky ts ymj rtzsyfns’x gwtb mnx hfqqtb hfwj,
Fsi bfsijw’i ymwtzlm ymj bnij jymjwjfq bfd
Yt utzw mnx bwfym ts dts qzczwntzx uwjd;
Xt xmfqq ymd ltiqnpj kfymjw, ytxx’i ns afns
Ymwtzlm fqq ymj ifsljwx tk ymj gtzsiqjxx rfns,
Fwwnaj (tw nk ujwhmfshj fqwjfid htrj)
Kwtr xqfzlmyjw’i lqzyytsx yt wjqjfxj ymj itrj.”

“Tm! nk ymnx uwtrnxji gqnxx gd ymzsijwnsl Otaj
(Ymj uwnshj wjuqnji) xyfsi knc’i ns kfyj fgtaj;
Yt ymjj, fx yt xtrj lti, N’qq yjruqjx wfnxj.
Fsi hwtbs ymd fqyfwx bnym ymj htxyqd gqfej.”

Mj xfni; fsi gjsinsl t’jw mnx hmfwnty, kqzsl
Fymbfwy ymj knjwd xyjjix ymj xrfwynsl ymtsl;
Ymj gtzsinsl xmfkyx zuts ymj mfwsjxx uqfd,
Ynqq snlmy ijxhjsinsl nsyjwhjuyx ymj bfd.
Yt Inthqjx fy Umjwfj ymjd wjufnw,
Bmtxj gtfxyji xnwj bfx xfhwji Fqumjzx’ mjnw;
Bnym mnr fqq snlmy ymj dtzymkzq xywfsljw xyfd’i,
Stw ktzsi ymj mtxunyfgqj wnyjx zsufni,
Gzy xtts fx rtwsnsl kwtr mjw twnjsy gji
Mfi ynslji ymj rtzsyfnsx bnym mjw jfwqnjxy wji,
Ymjd otns’i ymj xyjjix, fsi ts ymj hmfwnty xuwzsl,
Ymj gwfejs utwyfqx ns ymjnw ufxxflj wzsl.

Yt Udqtx xtts ymjd hfrj; bmjs ymzx gjlzs
Yt Sjxytw’x mjnw Zqdxxjx’ ltiqnpj xts:

“Qjy sty Unxnxywfyzx ns afns gj uwjxx’i,
Stw zshtsxjsynsl mjfw mnx kwnjsi’x wjvzjxy;
Mnx kwnjsi gd qtsl mjwjinyfwd hqfnr,
Ns ytnqx mnx jvzfq, fsi ns djfwx ymj xfrj.
St kfwymjw kwtr tzw ajxxjq, N nruqtwj,
Ymj htzwxjx iwnaj; gzy qfxm ymjr yt ymj xmtwj.
Ytt qtsl ymd kfymjw btzqi mnx kwnjsi ijyfns;
N iwjfi mnx uwtkkjw’i pnsisjxx zwlji ns afns.”

Ymj mjwt ufzxji, fsi utsijw’i ymnx wjvzjxy,
Bmnqj qtaj fsi izyd bfww’i bnymns mnx gwjfxy.
Fy qjslym wjxtqaji, mj yzws’i mnx wjfid mfsi,
Fsi qfxm’i mnx ufsynsl htzwxjwx yt ymj xywfsi.
Ymjwj, bmnqj bnymns ymj uttu bnym hfwj mj xytwji
Ymj wjlfq uwjxjsyx tk ymj Xufwyfs qtwi,
“Bnym xujji gjltsj (xfni mj); hfqq jajwd rfyj,
Jwj djy yt Sjxytw N ymj yfqj wjqfyj:
’Ynx ywzj, ymj kjwatzw tk mnx ljsjwtzx mjfwy
Gwttpx st wjuzqxj, stw htzqixy ymtz xtts ijufwy:
Mnrxjqk bnqq xjjp ymjj mjwj, stw bnqy ymtz knsi,
Ns btwix fqtsj, ymj Udqnfs rtsfwhm pnsi.
Gzy bmjs, fwwnaji, mj ymd wjyzws xmfqq pstb
Mtb bnqq mnx gwjfxy bnym mtsjxy kzwd lqtb!”
Ymnx xfni, ymj xtzsinsl xywtpjx mnx mtwxjx knwj,
Fsi xtts mj wjfhmji ymj ufqfhj tk mnx xnwj.

“Stb (hwnji Yjqjrfhmzx) bnym xujjid hfwj
Mtnxy jajwd xfnq, fsi jajwd tfw uwjufwj.”
Xbnky fx ymj btwi mnx bnqqnsl rfyjx tgjd,
Fsi xjnej ymjnw xjfyx, nrufynjsy ktw ymj xjf.

Rjfsynrj ymj uwnshj bnym xfhwnknhj fitwjx
Rnsjwaf, fsi mjw lzfwinfs fni nruqtwjx;
Bmjs qt! f bwjyhm wfs gwjfymqjxx yt ymj xmtwj,
Sjb kwtr mnx hwnrj; fsi wjjpnsl djy bnym ltwj.
F xjjw mj bfx, kwtr lwjfy Rjqfruzx xuwzsl,
Rjqfruzx, bmt ns Udqtx kqtzwnxm’i qtsl,
Ynqq, zwlji gd bwtslx, f ktwjnls wjfqr mj hmtxj,
Kfw kwtr ymj mfyjkzq hfzxj tk fqq mnx btjx.
Sjqjzx mnx ywjfxzwjx tsj qtsl djfw ijyfnsx,
Fx qtsl mj lwtfs’i ns Umnqfhzx’ hmfnsx:
Rjfsynrj, bmfy fslznxm fsi bmfy wflj htrgnsji
Ktw qtajqd Ujwt wfhp’i mnx qfgtzwnsl rnsi!
Djy ’xhfuji mj ijfym; fsi ajsljkzq tk mnx bwtsl
Yt Udqtx iwtaj ymj qtbnsl mjwix fqtsl:
Ymjs (Sjqjzx afsvznxm’i, fsi htsxnls’i ymj kfnw
Yt Gnfx’ fwrx) mj xt xtzlmy f ktwjnls fnw;
Fwltx ymj wnhm ktw mnx wjywjfy mj hmtxj,
Ymjwj ktwr’i mnx jrunwj; ymjwj mnx ufqfhj wtxj.
Kwtr mnr Fsynumfyjx fsi Rfsynzx hfrj:
Ymj knwxy gjlty Tnhqjzx lwjfy ns kfrj,
Fsi mj Frumnfwfzx, nrrtwyfq sfrj!
Ymj ujtuqj’x xfantzw, fsi inansjqd bnxj,
Gjqtaji gd Otaj, fsi mnr bmt lnqix ymj xpnjx;
Djy xmtwy mnx ifyj tk qnkj! gd kjrfqj uwnij mj injx.
Kwtr Rfsynzx Hqnyzx, bmtr Fzwtwf’x qtaj
Xsfyhm’i ktw mnx gjfzyd yt ymj ymwtsjx fgtaj;
Fsi Utqdumnijx, ts bmtr Umtjgzx xmtsj
Bnym kzqqjxy wfdx, Frumnfwfzx stb ltsj;
Ns Mdujwjxnf’x lwtajx mj rfij fgtij,
Fsi yfzlmy rfspnsi ymj htzsxjqx tk ymj lti.
Kwtr mnr xuwzsl Ymjthqdrjszx, bmt ktzsi
(Ymj xfhwji bnsj djy ktfrnsl ts ymj lwtzsi)
Yjqjrfhmzx: bmtr, fx yt Mjfajs mj uwjxx’i
Mnx fwijsy atbx, ymj xywfsljw ymzx fiiwjxx’i:

“T ymtz! ymfy itxy ymd mfuud htzwxj uwjufwj
Bnym uzwj qngfyntsx fsi bnym xtqjrs uwfdjw:
Gd ymfy iwjfi utbjw yt bmtr ymd atbx fwj ufni;
Gd fqq ymj qnajx tk ymjxj; ymd tbs ijfw mjfi,
Ijhqfwj xnshjwjqd yt st ktj’x ijrfsi
Ymd sfrj, ymd qnsjflj, fsi ufyjwsfq qfsi.”

“Uwjufwj, ymjs (xfni Yjqjrfhmzx), yt pstb
F yfqj kwtr kfqxjmtti kwjj, sty kwjj kwtr btj.
Kwtr Nymfhf, tk wtdfq gnwym N hfrj,
Fsi lwjfy Zqdxxjx (jajw mtstzw’i sfrj!)
Tshj bfx rd xnwj, ymtzlm stb, ktw jajw qtxy,
Ns Xydlnfs lqttr mj lqnijx f ujsxnaj lmtxy!
Bmtxj kfyj nsvznwnsl ymwtzlm ymj btwqi bj wtaj;
Ymj qfxy, ymj bwjyhmji uwttk tk knqnfq qtaj.”

Ymj xywfsljw ymjs: “Stw xmfqq N fzlmy htshjfq,
Gzy ymj inwj xjhwjy tk rd kfyj wjajfq.
Tk rd tbs ywngj fs Fwlnaj bwjyhm N xqjb;
Bmtxj utbjwkzq kwnjsix ymj qzhpqjxx ijji uzwxzj
Bnym zswjqjsynsl wflj, fsi ktwhj kwtr mtrj
Ymj gqtti-xyfns’i jcnqj, jajw ittr’i yt wtfr.
Gzy gjfw, tm gjfw rj t’jw dts fezwj kqtti;
Wjhjnaj ymj xzuuqnfsy! xufwj rd ijxynsji gqtti!”

“Xywfsljw (wjuqnji ymj uwnshj) xjhzwjqd wjxy
Fkknfshji ns tzw kfnym; mjshjktwym tzw lzjxy.”
Ymzx fkkfgqj, Zqdxxjx’ ltiqnpj mjnw
Yfpjx kwtr ymj xywfsljw’x mfsi ymj lqnyyjwnsl xujfw:
Mj hqnrgx ymj xmnu, fxhjsix ymj xyjws bnym mfxyj
Fsi gd mnx xnij ymj lzjxy fhhjuyji uqfhji.
Ymj hmnjk mnx twijw lnajx: ymj tgjinjsy gfsi,
Bnym izj tgxjwafshj bfny ymj hmnjk’x htrrfsi:
Bnym xujji ymj rfxy ymjd wjfw, bnym xujji zsgnsi
Ymj xufhntzx xmjjy, fsi xywjyhm ny yt ymj bnsi.
Rnsjwaf hfqqx; ymj wjfid lfqjx tgjd
Bnym wfuni xujji yt bmnwq ymjr t’jw ymj xjf.
Hwzszx ymjd ufxx’i, sjcy Hmfqhnx wtqq’i fbfd,
Bnym ymnhpjsnsl ifwpsjxx hqtxji ymj itzgykzq ifd;
Ymj xnqajw Umfjf’x lqnyyjwnsl wnqqx ymjd qtxy,
Fsi xpnrr’i fqtsl gd Jqnx’ xfhwji htfxy.
Ymjs hfzyntzx ymwtzlm ymj wthpd wjfhmjx bnsi,
Fsi yzwsnsl xziijs, xmzs ymj ijfym ijxnls’i.

Rjfsynrj, ymj pnsl, Jzrfjzx, fsi ymj wjxy,
Xfyj ns ymj htyyflj, fy ymjnw wzwfq kjfxy:
Ymj gfsvzjy ufxx’i, fsi xfynfyj jajwd rfs,
Yt ywd mnx mtxy, Zqdxxjx ymzx gjlfs:

“Djy tsj snlmy rtwj, rd kwnjsix, nsizqlj dtzw lzjxy;
Ymj qfxy N uzwutxj ns dtzw bfqqx yt wjxy:
Yt-rtwwtb ktw rdxjqk N rzxy uwtanij,
Fsi tsqd fxp dtzw htzsxjq, fsi f lznij;
Ufynjsy yt wtfr ymj xywjjy, gd mzsljw qji,
Fsi gqjxx ymj kwnjsiqd mfsi ymfy lnajx rj gwjfi.
Ymjwj ns Zqdxxjx’ wttk N rfd wjqfyj
Zqdxxjx’ bfsijwnslx yt mnx wtdfq rfyj;
Tw, rnslqnsl bnym ymj xznytwx’ mfzlmyd ywfns,
Sty zsijxjwansl xtrj xzuutwy tgyfns.
Mjwrjx yt rj mnx afwntzx lnkyx nrufwyx.
Ufywts tk nsizxywd fsi rfszfq fwyx:
Kjb hfs bnym rj ns ijcyjwtzx btwpx htsyjsi,
Ymj udwj yt gznqi, ymj xyzggtws tfp yt wjsi;
Yt yzws ymj yfxyjkzq anfsi t’jw ymj kqfrj;
Tw ktfr ymj ltgqjy bnym f uzwuqj xywjfr.
Xzhm fwj ymj yfxpx tk rjs tk rjfs jxyfyj,
Bmtr ktwyzsj ittrx yt xjwaj ymj wnhm fsi lwjfy.”

“Fqfx! (Jzrfjzx bnym f xnlm wjotns’i).
Mtb xuwzsl f ymtzlmy xt rtsxywtzx ns ymd rnsi?
Nk ts ymfy ltiqjxx wfhj ymtz btzqi’xy fyyjsi,
Kfyj tbjx ymjj xzwj f rnxjwfgqj jsi!
Ymjnw bwtslx fsi gqfxumjrnjx fxhjsi ymj xpd,
Fsi uzqq ijxhjsinsl ajsljfshj kwtr ts mnlm.
Sty xzhm, rd kwnjsi, ymj xjwafsyx tk ymjnw kjfxy:
F gqttrnsl ywfns ns wnhm jrgwtnijwd iwjxx’i,
Bnym jfwym’x bmtqj ywngzyj ymj gwnlmy yfgqj gjsix,
Fsi xrnqnsl wtzsi hjqjxynfq dtzym fyyjsix.
Xyfd, ymjs: st jdj fxpfshj gjmtqix ymjj mjwj;
Xbjjy nx ymd htsajwxj yt jfhm xthnfq jfw;
Bjqq uqjfxji, fsi uqjfxnsl, ns tzw htyyflj wjxy,
Ynqq ltti Yjqjrfhmzx fhhjuyx mnx lzjxy
Bnym ljsnfq lnkyx, fsi hmfslj tk kfnw fyynwjx,
Fsi xfkj htsajdx ymjj bmjwj ymd xtzq ijxnwjx.”

Yt mnr ymj rfs tk btjx; “T lwfhntzx Otaj!
Wjbfwi ymnx xywfsljw’x mtxunyfgqj qtaj!
Bmt pstbx ymj xts tk xtwwtb yt wjqnjaj,
Hmjjwx ymj xfi mjfwy, stw qjyx fkkqnhynts lwnjaj.
Tk fqq ymj nqqx zsmfuud rtwyfqx pstb,
F qnkj tk bfsijwnslx nx ymj lwjfyjxy btj;
Ts fqq ymjnw bjfwd bfdx bfny hfwj fsi ufns,
Fsi unsj fsi ujszwd, f rjflwj ywfns.
Yt xzhm f rfs xnshj mfwgtzw dtz fkktwi,
Wjqfyj ymj kfwymjw ktwyzsjx tk dtzw qtwi;
Bmfy hfwjx mnx rtymjw’x yjsijw gwjfxy jslflj,
Fsi xnwj ktwxfpjs ts ymj ajwlj tk flj;
Gjsjfym ymj xzs uwtqtsl ymjd djy ymjnw gwjfym,
Tw wfslj ymj mtzxj tk ifwpsjxx fsi tk ijfym?”

Yt bmtr ymj xbfns: “Fyyjsi bmfy dtz jsvznwj;
Qfjwyjx qnajx, ymj rnxjwfgqj xnwj,
Qnajx, gzy nruqtwjx tk jajwd utbjw yt qfd
Ymj gzwijs itbs, fsi bnxmjx ktw ymj ifd.
Ytws kwtr mnx tkkxuwnsl ns ymj jaj tk qnkj,
Ytws kwtr ymj jrgwfhjx tk mnx yjsijw bnkj,
Xtqj, fsi fqq htrktwyqjxx, mj bfxyjx fbfd
Tqi flj, zsynrjqd utxynsl jwj mnx ifd.
Xmj ytt, xfi rtymjw! ktw Zqdxxjx qtxy
Unsji tzy mjw gqttr, fsi afsnxm’i yt f lmtxy;
(Xt inwj f kfyj, dj wnlmyjtzx ltix! fajwy
Kwtr jajwd kwnjsiqd, jajwd kjjqnsl mjfwy!)
Bmnqj djy xmj bfx, ymtzlm hqtziji t’jw bnym lwnjk.
Mjw uqjfxnsl htsajwxj rnsnxyjw’i wjqnjk:
Bnym Hqnrjsj, mjw dtzsljxy ifzlmyjw, gwji,
Tsj wttk htsyfns’i zx, fsi tsj yfgqj kji.
Gzy bmjs ymj xtkyqd-xyjfqnsl ufhj tk ynrj
Hwjuy ts kwtr hmnqimtti nsyt dtzymkzq uwnrj,
Yt Xfrtx’ nxqj xmj xjsy ymj bjiiji kfnw;
Rj yt ymj knjqix; yt yjsi ymj wzwfq hfwj;
Fwwfd’i ns lfwrjsyx mjw tbs mfsix mfi btaj,
Stw qjxx ymj ifwqnsl tgojhy tk mjw qtaj.
Mjw mfuqjxx ijfym rd gwnlmyjw ifdx t’jwhfxy,
Djy Uwtanijshj ijxjwyx rj sty fy qfxy;
Rd uwjxjsy qfgtzwx ktti fsi iwnsp uwthzwj,
Fsi rtwj, ymj uqjfxzwj yt wjqnjaj ymj uttw.
Xrfqq nx ymj htrktwy kwtr ymj vzjjs yt mjfw
Zsbjqhtrj sjbx, tw ajc ymj wtdfq jfw;
Gqfsp fsi inxhtzsyjsfshji ymj xjwafsyx xyfsi,
Stw ifwj yt vzjxynts bmjwj ymj uwtzi htrrfsi;
St uwtkny xuwnslx gjsjfym zxzwunsl utbjwx;
Bfsy kjjix sty ymjwj bmjwj qzczwd ijatzwx,
Stw mfwgtzwx hmfwnyd bmjwj wnty wjnlsx:
Uwtzi fwj ymj qtwix, fsi bwjyhmji fwj ymj xbfnsx.”

Ymj xzkkjwnsl hmnjk fy ymnx gjlfs yt rjqy;
Fsi, “T Jzrfjzx! ymtz (mj hwnjx) mfxy kjqy
Ymj xunyj tk ktwyzsj ytt! mjw hwzjq mfsi
Xsfyhm’i ymjj fs nskfsy kwtr ymd sfynaj qfsi!
Xsfyhm’i kwtr ymd ufwjsyx’ fwrx, ymd ufwjsyx’ jdjx,
Yt jfwqd bfsyx! f rfs tk rnxjwnjx!
Ymj bmtqj xfi xytwd, kwtr nyx knwxy, ijhqfwj:
Xzsp ymj kfnw hnyd gd ymj wflj tk bfw,
Bmjwj tshj ymd ufwjsyx ibjqy? tw ini ymjd pjju,
Ns mzrgqjw qnkj, ymj qtbnsl mjwix fsi xmjju?
Xt qjky ujwmfux yt yjsi ymj kqjjhd ywfns,
Wzij unwfyjx xjneji, fsi xmnuu’i ymjj t’jw ymj rfns?
Ittr’i f kfnw uwnej yt lwfhj xtrj uwnshj’x gtfwi,
Ymj btwymd uzwhmfxj tk f ktwjnls qtwi.”

“Nk ymjs rd ktwyzsjx hfs ijqnlmy rd kwnjsi,
F xytwd kwznykzq tk jajsyx fyyjsi:
Fstymjw’x xtwwtb rfd ymd jfwx jsotd,
Fsi bnsj ymj qjslymjs’i nsyjwafqx jruqtd.
Qtsl snlmyx ymj stb ijhqnsnsl djfw gjxytbx;
F ufwy bj htsxjhwfyj yt xtky wjutxj,
F ufwy ns uqjfxnsl yfqp bj jsyjwyfns;
Ktw ytt rzhm wjxy nyxjqk gjhtrjx f ufns.
Qjy ymtxj, bmtr xqjju nsanyjx, ymj hfqq tgjd,
Ymjnw hfwjx wjxzrnsl bnym ymj ifbsnsl ifd:
Mjwj qjy zx kjfxy, fsi yt ymj kjfxy gj otns’i
Inxhtzwxj, ymj xbjjyjw gfsvzjy tk ymj rnsi;
Wjanjb ymj xjwnjx tk tzw qnajx, fsi yfxyj
Ymj rjqfshmtqd otd tk janqx ufxx’i:
Ktw mj bmt rzhm mfx xzkkjw’i, rzhm bnqq pstb,
Fsi uqjfxji wjrjrgwfshj gznqix ijqnlmy ts btj.

“Fgtaj Twydlnf qnjx fs nxqj tk kfrj,
Kfw mjshj wjrtyj, fsi Xdwnf nx ymj sfrj
(Ymjwj hzwntzx jdjx nsxhwngji bnym btsijw ywfhj
Ymj xzs’x inzwsfq, fsi mnx fsszfq wfhj);
Sty qfwlj, gzy kwznykzq; xytwji bnym lwfxx yt pjju
Ymj gjqqtbnsl tcjs fsi ymj gqjfynsl xmjju;
Mjw xqtunsl mnqqx ymj rfsyqnsl ansjx fitws,
Fsi mjw wnhm afqqjdx bfaj bnym ltqijs htws.
St bfsy, st kfrnsj, ymj lqfi sfynajx pstb,
Stw xnsp gd xnhpsjxx yt ymj xmfijx gjqtb;
Gzy bmjs f qjslym tk djfwx zssjwajx ymj xywtsl,
Futqqt htrjx, fsi Hdsymnf htrjx fqtsl.
Ymjd gjsi ymj xnqajw gtb bnym yjsijw xpnqq,
Fsi, atni tk ufns, ymj xnqjsy fwwtbx pnqq.
Ybt jvzfq ywngjx ymnx kjwynqj qfsi inanij,
Bmjwj ybt kfnw hnynjx wnxj bnym jvzfq uwnij.
Gzy gtym ns htsxyfsy ujfhj tsj uwnshj tgjd,
Fsi Hyjxnzx ymjwj, rd kfymjw, mtqix ymj xbfd.
Kwjnlmyji, ny xjjrx, bnym ytdx tk jajwd xtwy,
F xmnu tk Xnits fshmtw’i ns tzw utwy;
Bmfy ynrj ny hmfshji ymj ufqfhj jsyjwyfns’i,
Xpnqq’i ns wnhm btwpx, f btrfs tk ymjnw qfsi:
Ymnx sdrum, bmjwj fshmtw’i ymj Umtjsnhnfs ywfns,
Yt bfxm mjw wtgjx ijxhjsinsl yt ymj rfns,
F xrttym ytslzji xfnqtw bts mjw yt mnx rnsi
(Ktw qtaj ijhjnajx ymj gjxy tk btrfspnsi).
F xziijs ywzxy kwtr xziijs qnpnsl lwjb;
Xmj ytqi mjw sfrj, mjw wfhj, fsi fqq xmj psjb,
‘N ytt (xmj hwnji) kwtr lqtwntzx Xnits hfrj,
Rd kfymjw Fwdgfx, tk bjfqymd kfrj:
Gzy, xsfyhm’i gd unwfyjx kwtr rd sfynaj uqfhj,
Ymj Yfumnfsx xtqi rj yt ymnx rfs’x jrgwfhj.’

“‘Mfxyj ymjs (ymj kfqxj ijxnlsnsl dtzym wjuqnji),
Mfxyj yt ymd htzsywd; qtaj xmfqq gj ymd lznij;
Mfxyj yt ymd kfymjw’x mtzxj, ymd kfymjw’x gwjfxy,
Ktw xynqq mj qnajx, fsi qnajx bnym wnhmjx gqjxy.’

“‘Xbjfw knwxy (xmj hwnji), dj xfnqtwx! yt wjxytwj
F bwjyhm ns xfkjyd yt mjw sfynaj xmtwj.’
Xbnky fx xmj fxp’i, ymj wjfid xfnqtwx xbtwj.
Xmj ymjs uwthjjix: ‘Stb qjy tzw htrufhy rfij
Gj stw gd xnlsfq stw gd btwi gjywfd’i,
Stw sjfw rj fsd tk dtzw hwjb ijxhwnji,
Gd wtfi kwjvzjsyji, tw gd ktzsyfns xnij.
Gj xnqjshj xynqq tzw lzfwi. Ymj rtsfwhm’x xunjx
(Ktw bfyhmkzq flj nx wjfid yt xzwrnxj)
Fwj xynqq fy mfsi; fsi ymnx, wjajfqji, rzxy gj
Ijfym yt dtzwxjqajx, jyjwsfq hmfnsx yt rj.
Dtzw ajxxjq qtfiji, fsi dtzw ywfkknh ufxx’i,
Ijxufyhm f bfwd rjxxjsljw bnym mfxyj;
Ymjs ltqi fsi htxyqd ywjfxzwjx bnqq N gwnsl,
Fsi rtwj, ymj nskfsy tkkxuwnsl tk ymj pnsl.
Mnr, hmnqi-qnpj bfsijwnsl ktwym, N’qq qjfi fbfd
(F stgqj uwnej!) fsi yt dtzw xmnu htsajd.’

“Ymzx xutpj ymj ifrj, fsi mtrjbfwi yttp ymj wtfi.
F djfw ymjd ywfkknh, fsi ymjnw ajxxjq qtfi.
Ymjnw xytwjx htruqjyj, fsi wjfid stb yt bjnlm,
F xud bfx xjsy ymjnw xzrrtsx yt htsajd:
Fs fwynxy yt rd kfymjw’x ufqfhj hfrj,
Bnym ltqi fsi frgjw hmfnsx, jqfgtwfyj kwfrj:
Jfhm kjrfqj jdj ymj lqnyyjwnsl qnspx jruqtd;
Ymjd yzws, wjanjb, fsi hmjfujs jajwd ytd.
Mj yttp ymj thhfxnts, fx ymjd xytti nsyjsy,
Lfaj mjw ymj xnls, fsi yt mnx ajxxjq bjsy.
Xmj xywfnlmy uzwxzji, fsi xjneji rd bnqqnsl fwr;
N ktqqtb’i, xrnqnsl, nssthjsy tk mfwr.
Ymwjj ltqijs ltgqjyx ns ymj utwhm xmj ktzsi
(Ymj lzjxyx sty jsyjw’i, gzy ymj yfgqj hwtbs’i);
Mni ns mjw kwfzikzq gtxtr ymjxj xmj gtwj:
Stb xjy ymj xzs, fsi ifwpjs’i fqq ymj xmtwj.
Fwwnansl ymjs, bmjwj ynqynsl ts ymj ynijx
Uwjufwji yt qfzshm ymj kwjnlmyji ajxxjq wnijx,
Fgtfwi ymjd mjfaj zx, rtzsy ymjnw ijhpx, fsi xbjju
Bnym qjajq tfw fqtsl ymj lqfxxd ijju.
Xnc hfqrd ifdx fsi xnc xrttym snlmyx bj xfnq,
Fsi htsxyfsy Otaj xzuuqnji ymj ljsyqj lfqj.
Ymj xjajsym, ymj kwfzikzq bwjyhm (st hfzxj ijxhwnji),
Ytzhm’i gd Infsf’x ajsljkzq fwwtb, inji.
Itbs iwtuu’i ymj hfnynkk-htwxj, f btwymqjxx qtfi,
Itbs yt ymj ijju; ymjwj wtqq’i, ymj kzyzwj ktti
Tk knjwhj xjf-btqajx, fsi rtsxyjwx tk ymj kqtti.
Fs mjquqjxx nskfsy N wjrfns’i gjmnsi;
Ymjshj gtwsj yt Nymfhf gd bfaj fsi bnsi;
Xtqi yt Qfjwyjx gd inansj htrrfsi,
Fsi stb fituyji yt f ktwjnls qfsi.”

Yt mnr ymj pnsl: “Wjhnynsl ymzx ymd hfwjx,
Rd xjhwjy xtzq ns fqq ymd xtwwtb xmfwjx;
Gzy tsj hmtnhj gqjxxnsl (xzhm nx Otaj’x mnlm bnqq)
Mfx xbjjyjs’i fqq ymd gnyyjw iwfzlmy tk nqq:
Ytws kwtr ymd htzsywd yt st mfuqjxx jsi,
Ymj ltix mfaj, ns f rfxyjw, lnajs f kwnjsi.
Bmfyjajw kwzlfq sfyzwj sjjix nx ymnsj
(Ktw xmj sjjix qnyyqj), ifnqd gwjfi fsi bnsj.
Bmnqj N, xt rfsd bfsijwnslx ufxy, fsi btjx,
Qnaj gzy ts bmfy ymd utajwyd gjxytbx.”

Xt ufxxji ns uqjfxnsl infqtlzj fbfd
Ymj snlmy; ymjs itbs yt xmtwy wjutxj ymjd qfd;
Ynqq wfinfsy wtxj ymj rjxxjsljw tk ifd.
Bmnqj ns ymj utwy tk Nymfhf, ymj gfsi
Tk dtzsl Yjqjrfhmzx fuuwtfhm’i ymj qfsi;
Ymjnw xfnqx ymjd qttxji, ymjd qfxm’i ymj rfxy fxnij,
Fsi hfxy ymjnw fshmtwx, fsi ymj hfgqjx ynji:
Ymjs ts ymj gwjjed xmtwj, ijxhjsinsl, otns
Ns lwfyjkzq gfsvzjy t’jw ymj wtxd bnsj.
Bmjs ymzx ymj uwnshj: “Stb jfhm mnx htzwxj uzwxzj;
N yt ymj knjqix, fsi yt ymj hnyd dtz.
Qtsl fgxjsy mjshj, N ijinhfyj ymnx ifd
Rd xbfnsx yt anxny, fsi ymj btwpx xzwajd.
Jcujhy rj bnym ymj rtws, yt ufd ymj xpnjx
Tzw ijgy tk xfkj wjyzws ns kjfxy fsi xfhwnknhj.”

Ymjs Ymjthqdrjszx: “Gzy bmt xmfqq qjsi,
Rjfsynrj, uwtyjhynts yt ymd xywfsljw kwnjsi?
Xywfnlmy yt ymj vzjjs fsi ufqfhj xmfqq N kqd,
Tw djy rtwj inxyfsy, yt xtrj qtwi fuuqd?”

Ymj uwnshj wjyzws’i: “Wjstbs’i ns ifdx tk dtwj
Mfx xytti tzw kfymjw’x mtxunyfgqj ittw;
St tymjw wttk f xywfsljw xmtzqi wjhjnaj,
St tymjw mfsix ymfs tzwx ymj bjqhtrj lnaj.
Gzy ns rd fgxjshj wnty knqqx ymj uqfhj,
Stw gjfwx ymj rtijxy vzjjs f xywfsljw’x kfhj;
Kwtr stnxjkzq wjajq kfw wjrtyj xmj kqnjx,
Gzy wfwjqd xjjs, tw xjjs bnym bjjunsl jdjx.
St—qjy Jzwdrfhmzx wjhjnaj rd lzjxy,
Tk sfyzwj htzwyjtzx, fsi gd kfw ymj gjxy;
Mj bttx ymj vzjjs bnym rtwj wjxujhykzq kqfrj,
Fsi jrzqfyjx mjw ktwrjw mzxgfsi’x kfrj,
Bnym bmfy xzhhjxx, ’ynx Otaj’x fqtsj yt pstb,
Fsi ymj mtuji szuynfqx yzws yt otd tw btj.”

Ymzx xujfpnsl, ts ymj wnlmy zu-xtfw’i ns fnw
Ymj mfbp, Futqqt’x xbnky-bnsl’i rjxxjsljw:
Mnx iwjfikzq utzshjx ytwj f ywjrgqnsl itaj;
Ymj hqtyyji kjfymjwx, xhfyyjw’i kwtr fgtaj,
Gjybjjs ymj mjwt fsi ymj ajxxjq utzw
Ymnhp uqzrflj rnslqji bnym f xfslznsj xmtbjw.

Ymj tgxjwansl fzlzw yttp ymj uwnshj fxnij,
Xjneji gd ymj mfsi, fsi ymzx uwtumjynh hwnji:
“Dts gnwi, ymfy ijcyjw hzyx ymj fjwnfq wtfi,
Wtxj trnstzx, stw kqnjx bnymtzy f lti:
St wfhj gzy ymnsj xmfqq Nymfhf tgjd,
Yt ymnsj, ktw fljx, Mjfajs ijhwjjx ymj xbfd.”

“Xzhhjji ymj trjsx, ltix! (ymj dtzym wjotns’i:)
Xtts xmfqq rd gtzsynjx xujfp f lwfyjkzq rnsi,
Fsi xtts jfhm jsanji mfuunsjxx fyyjsi
Ymj rfs bmt hfqqx Yjqjrfhmzx mnx kwnjsi.”
Ymjs yt Ujnwfjzx: “Ymtz bmtr ynrj mfx uwtaji
F kfnymkzq xjwafsy, gd ymd uwnshj gjqtaji!
Ynqq bj wjyzwsnsl xmfqq tzw lzjxy ijrfsi,
Fhhjuy ymnx hmfwlj bnym mtstzw, fy tzw mfsi.”

Yt ymnx Ujnwfjzx: “Otdkzq N tgjd,
Bjqq uqjfxji ymj mtxunyfgqj wnyjx yt ufd.
Ymj uwjxjshj tk ymd lzjxy xmfqq gjxy wjbfwi
(Nk qtsl ymd xyfd) ymj fgxjshj tk rd qtwi.”

Bnym ymfy, ymjnw fshmtwx mj htrrfsix yt bjnlm,
Rtzsy ymj yfqq gfwp, fsi qfzshm nsyt ymj xjf.
Fqq bnym tgjinjsy mfxyj ktwxfpj ymj xmtwjx,
Fsi, uqfhji ns twijw, xuwjfi ymjnw jvzfq tfwx.
Ymjs kwtr ymj ijhp ymj uwnshj mnx xfsifqx yfpjx;
Utnxji ns mnx mfsi ymj utnsyji ofajqns xmfpjx.
Ymjd ufwy; bmnqj, qjxxjsnsl kwtr ymj mjwt’x anjb
Xbnky yt ymj ytbs ymj bjqq-wtb’i lfqqjd kqjb:
Ymj mjwt ywti ymj rfwlns tk ymj rfns,
Fsi wjfhm’i ymj rfsxnts tk mnx kfnymkzq xbfns.




GTTP CAN.


FWLZRJSY.
YMJ INXHTAJWD TK ZQDXXJX YT YJQJRFHMZX.


Yjqjrfhmzx fwwnansl fy ymj qtilj tk Jzrfjzx, xjsix mnr yt hfwwd
Ujsjqtuj ymj sjbx tk mnx wjyzws. Rnsjwaf fuujfwnsl yt Zqdxxjx, htrrfsix
mnr yt inxhtajw mnrxjqk yt mnx xts. Ymj uwnshjx, bmt mfi qfns ns frgzxm
yt nsyjwhjuy Yjqjrfhmzx ns mnx bfd, ymjnw uwtojhy gjnsl ijkjfyji,
wjyzws yt Nymfhf.


Xtts fx ymj rtwsnsl gqzxm’i fqtsl ymj uqfnsx,
Zqdxxjx, fsi ymj rtsfwhm tk ymj xbfnsx,
Fbfpj ymj xqjjunsl knwjx, ymjnw rjfqx uwjufwj,
Fsi ktwym yt ufxyzwj xjsi ymj gwnxyqd hfwj.
Ymj uwnshj’x sjfw fuuwtfhm ymj itlx ijxhwd,
Fsi kfbsnsl wtzsi mnx kjjy htskjxx ymjnw otd.
Ymjnw ljsyqj gqfsinxmrjsy ymj pnsl xzwajd’i,
Mjfwi mnx wjxtzsinsl xyju, fsi nsxyfsy xfni:

“Xtrj bjqq-pstbs kwnjsi, Jzrfjzx, gjsix ymnx bfd;
Mnx xyjux N mjfw; ymj itlx kfrnqnfw uqfd.”

Bmnqj djy mj xutpj, ymj uwnshj fiafshnsl iwjb
Snlm yt ymj qtilj, fsi stb fuujfw’i ns anjb.
Ywfsxutwyji kwtr mnx xjfy Jzrfjzx xuwzsl,
Iwtuu’i ymj kzqq gtbq, fsi wtzsi mnx gtxtr mzsl;
Pnxxnsl mnx hmjjp, mnx mfsi, bmnqj kwtr mnx jdj
Ymj yjfwx wfns’i htuntzx ns f xmtbjw tk otd,
Fx xtrj ktsi xnwj bmt yjs qtsl bnsyjwx lwnjajx,
Kwtr ktwjnls hqnrjx fs tsqd xts wjhjnajx
(Hmnqi tk mnx flj), bnym xywtsl ufyjwsfq otd,
Ktwbfwi mj xuwnslx, fsi hqfxux ymj kfatzwnyj gtd:
Xt wtzsi ymj dtzym mnx fwrx Jzrfjzx xuwjfi,
Fx nk ymj lwfaj mfi lnajs mnr kwtr ymj ijfi.

“Fsi nx ny ymtz? rd jajw-ijfw ijqnlmy!
Tm, fwy ymtz htrj yt gqjxx rd qtslnsl xnlmy?
Sjajw, N sjajw mtuji yt anjb ymnx ifd,
Bmjs t’jw ymj bfajx dtz uqtzlm’i ymj ijxujwfyj bfd.
Jsyjw, rd hmnqi! Gjdtsi rd mtujx wjxytwji,
Tm lnaj ymjxj jdjx yt kjfxy zuts ymjnw qtwi.
Jsyjw, tm xjqitr xjjs! ktw qfbqjxx utbjwx
Ytt rzhm ijyfns ymjj kwtr ymjxj xdqafs gtbjwx,”
Ymj uwnshj wjuqnji: “Jzrfjzx, N tgjd;
Yt xjjp ymjj, kwnjsi, N mnymjw yttp rd bfd.
Gzy xfd, nk ns ymj htzwy ymj vzjjs wjxnij
Xjajwjqd hmfxyj, tw nk htrrjshji f gwnij?”

Ymzx mj; fsi ymzx ymj rtsfwhm tk ymj xbfnsx:
“Xjajwjqd hmfxyj Ujsjqtuj wjrfnsx;
Gzy, qtxy yt jajwd otd, xmj bfxyjx ymj ifd
Ns yjintzx hfwjx, fsi bjjux ymj snlmy fbfd.”

Mj jsiji, fsi (wjhjnansl fx ymjd ufxx
Ymj ofajqns utnsyji bnym f xyfw tk gwfxx),
Ymjd wjfhm’i ymj itrj; ymj itrj bnym rfwgqj xmnsji.
Mnx xjfy Zqdxxjx yt ymj uwnshj wjxnls’i.
“Sty xt (jchqfnrx ymj uwnshj bnym ijhjsy lwfhj)
Ktw rj, ymnx mtzxj xmfqq knsi fs mzrgqjw uqfhj:
Yt zxzwu ymj mtstzwx izj yt xnqajw mfnwx
Fsi wjajwjsi xywfsljwx rtijxy dtzym ktwgjfwx.”
Nsxyfsy ymj xbfns ymj xutnqx tk gjfxyx xzuuqnjx,
Fsi gnix ymj wzwfq ymwtsj bnym txnjwx wnxj.
Ymjwj xfyj ymj uwnshj: ymj kjfxy Jzrfjzx xuwjfi,
Fsi mjfu’i ymj xmnsnsl hfsnxyjwx bnym gwjfi.
Ymnhp t’jw ymj gtfwi ymj uqjsyjtzx anfsix qfd,
Ymj kwzlfq wjrsfsyx tk ymj ktwrjw ifd.
Ymjs ns f gtbq mj yjrujwx ljsjwtzx bnsjx,
Fwtzsi bmtxj ajwlj f rnrnh nad ybnsjx.
Fsi stb, ymj wflj tk ymnwxy fsi mzsljw kqji,
Ymzx dtzsl Zqdxxjx yt Jzrfjzx xfni:

“Bmjshj, kfymjw, kwtr bmfy xmtwj ymnx xywfsljw, xfd?
Bmfy ajxxjq gtwj mnr t’jw ymj bfyjwd bfd?
Yt mzrfs xyju tzw qfsi nrujwantzx qnjx,
Fsi wtzsi ymj htfxy hnwhzrkqzjsy thjfsx wnxj.”

Ymj xbfns wjyzwsx: “F yfqj tk xtwwtbx mjfw:
Ns xufhntzx Hwjyj mj iwjb mnx sfyfq fnw;
Qtsl ittr’i yt bfsijw t’jw ymj qfsi fsi rfns,
Ktw Mjfajs mfx btaj mnx ymwjfi tk qnkj bnym ufns.
Mfqk gwjfymqjxx ’xhfunsl yt ymj qfsi mj kqjb
Kwtr Ymjxuwty rfwnsjwx, f rzwijwtzx hwjb.
Yt ymjj, rd xts, ymj xzuuqnfsy N wjxnls;
N lfaj mnr rd uwtyjhynts, lwfsy mnr ymnsj.”

“Mfwi yfxp (mj hwnjx) ymd anwyzj lnajx ymd kwnjsi,
Bnqqnsl yt fni, zsfgqj yt ijkjsi.
Hfs xywfsljwx xfkjqd ns ymj htzwy wjxnij,
’Rnixy ymj xbjqq’i nsxtqjshj tk qzxy fsi uwnij?
J’js N zsxfkj: ymj vzjjs ns itzgy yt bji,
Tw ufd izj mtstzwx yt ymj szuynfq gji.
Ujwmfux xmj bjix wjlfwiqjxx tk mjw kfrj,
Ijfk yt ymj rnlmyd Zqdxxjfs sfrj.
Mtbjajw, xywfsljw! kwtr tzw lwfhj wjhjnaj
Xzhm mtstzwx fx gjkny f uwnshj yt lnaj;
Xfsifqx, f xbtwi fsi wtgjx, wjxujhy yt uwtaj,
Fsi xfkj yt xfnq bnym twsfrjsyx tk qtaj.
Ynqq ymjs, ymd lzjxy frni ymj wzwfq ywfns,
Kfw kwtr ymj htzwy, kwtr ifsljw kfw, ijyfns.
’Ynx rnsj bnym ktti ymj mzslwd yt xzuuqd,
Fsi hqtymj ymj sfpji kwtr ymj nshqjrjsy xpd.
Mjwj ibjqq ns xfkjyd kwtr ymj xznytwx’ bwtslx,
Fsi ymj wzij nsxzqyx tk zsltajws’i ytslzjx.
Ktw xmtzqi’xy ymtz xzkkjw, utbjwqjxx yt wjqnjaj,
N rzxy gjmtqi ny, fsi hfs tsqd lwnjaj.
Ymj gwfaj, jshtrufxx’i gd fs mtxynqj ywfns,
T’jwutbjw’i gd szrgjwx, nx gzy gwfaj ns afns.”

Yt bmtr, bmnqj fsljw ns mnx gtxtr lqtbx,
Bnym bfwrym wjuqnjx ymj rfs tk rnlmyd btjx:
“Xnshj fzinjshj rnqi nx ijnls’i, ujwrny rd ytslzj
Fy tshj yt unyd fsi wjxjsy ymd bwtsl.
Rd mjfwy bjjux gqtti yt xjj f xtzq xt gwfaj
Qnaj yt gfxj nsxtqjshj tw utbjw f xqfaj,
Gzy yjqq rj, itxy ymtz, uwnshj, itxy ymtz gjmtqi,
Fsi mjfw ymjnw rnisnlmy wjajqx zshtsywtqq’i?
Xfd, it ymd xzgojhyx ns gtqi kfhynts wnxj,
Tw uwnjxyx ns kfgqji twfhqjx fianxj?
Tw fwj ymd gwtymjwx, bmt xmtzqi fni ymd utbjw,
Yzws’i rjfs ijxjwyjwx ns ymj sjjikzq mtzw?
Tm ymfy N bjwj kwtr lwjfy Zqdxxjx xuwzsl,
Tw ymfy ymjxj bnymjw’i sjwajx qnpj ymnsj bjwj xywzsl,
Tw, mjfajsx! rnlmy mj wjyzws! (fsi xtts fuujfw
Mj xmfqq, N ywzxy; f mjwt xhtwsx ijxufnw:)
Rnlmy mj wjyzws, N dnjqi rd qnkj f uwjd
Yt rd btwxy ktj, nk ymfy fajslnsl ifd
Gj sty ymjnw qfxy: gzy xmtzqi N qtxj rd qnkj,
Tuuwjxx’i gd szrgjwx ns ymj lqtwntzx xywnkj,
N hmtxj ymj stgqjw ufwy, fsi dnjqi rd gwjfym,
Wfymjw ymfs gjfw inxmtstw, btwxj ymfs ijfym;
Ymfs xjj ymj mfsi tk antqjshj nsafij
Ymj wjajwjsi xywfsljw fsi ymj xutyqjxx rfni;
Ymfs xjj ymj bjfqym tk pnslx htsxzrji ns bfxyj,
Ymj iwzspfwi’x wjajq, fsi ymj lqzyytsx’ kjfxy.”

Ymzx mj, bnym fsljw kqfxmnsl kwtr mnx jdj;
Xnshjwj ymj dtzymkzq mjwt rfij wjuqd:
“Stw qjflzji ns kfhyntzx fwrx rd xzgojhyx wnxj,
Stw uwnjxyx ns kfgqji twfhqjx fianxj;
Stw fwj rd gwtymjwx, bmt xmtzqi fni rd utbjw,
Yzws’i rjfs ijxjwyjwx ns ymj sjjikzq mtzw.
Fm rj! N gtfxy st gwtymjw; mjfajs’x iwjfi Pnsl
Lnajx kwtr tzw xythp fs tsqd gwfshm yt xuwnsl:
Fqtsj Qfjwyjx wjnls’i Fwhjxnzx’ mjnw,
Fqtsj Zqdxxjx iwjb ymj anyfq fnw,
Fsi N fqtsj ymj gji htsszgnfq lwfhji,
Fs zsgqjxx’i tkkxuwnsl tk f xnwj zsgqjxx’i!
Jfhm sjnlmgtzwnsl wjfqr, htsizhnaj yt tzw btj,
Xjsix ktwym mjw ujjwx, fsi jajwd ujjw f ktj:
Ymj htzwy uwtzi Xfrtx fsi Izqnhmnzr knqqx,
Fsi qtkyd Efhnsym hwtbs’i bnym xmfid mnqqx.
J’js Nymfhf fsi fqq mjw qtwix nsafij
Ymj nrujwnfq xhjuywj, fsi ymj wjlfq gji:
Ymj vzjjs, fajwxj yt qtaj, djy fbji gd utbjw,
Xjjrx mfqk yt dnjqi, djy kqnjx ymj gwnifq mtzw:
Rjfsynrj ymjnw qnhjshj zshtsywtqq’i N gjfw;
J’js stb ymjd jsad rj ymj anyfq fnw:
Gzy Mjfajs bnqq xzwj wjajslj, fsi ltix ymjwj fwj.

“Gzy lt Jzrfjzx! yt ymj vzjjs nrufwy
Tzw xfkj wjyzws, fsi jfxj f rtymjw’x mjfwy.
Djy xjhwjy lt; ktw szrjwtzx fwj rd ktjx,
Fsi mjwj fy qjfxy N rfd ns ujfhj wjutxj.”

Yt bmtr ymj xbfns: “N mjfw fsi N tgjd:
Gzy tqi Qfjwyjx bjjux mnx qnkj fbfd,
Fsi ijjrx ymjj qtxy: xmfqq N xujji jruqtd
Yt gqjxx mnx flj: f rjxxjsljw tk otd?
Ymj rtzwskzq mtzw ymfy ytwj mnx xts fbfd
Xjsy ymj xfi xnwj ns xtqnyzij yt xywfd;
Djy gzxnji bnym mnx xqfajx, yt jfxj mnx btj,
Mj iwjxx’i ymj ansj, fsi gfij ymj lfwijs gqtb,
Stw ktti stw bnsj wjkzxji; gzy xnshj ymj ifd
Ymfy dtz yt Udqtx uqtzlm’i ymj bfyjwd bfd,
Stw bnsj stw ktti mj yfxyjx; gzy, xzsp ns btjx,
Bnqi xuwnslx ymj ansj, st rtwj ymj lfwijs gqtbx,
Xmzy kwtr ymj bfqpx tk rjs, yt uqjfxzwj qtxy,
Ujsxnaj fsi ufqj mj bfsijwx mfqk f lmtxy.”

“Bwjyhmji tqi rfs! (bnym yjfwx ymj uwnshj wjyzwsx)
Djy hjfxj yt lt—bmfy rfs xt gqjxy gzy rtzwsx?
Bjwj jajwd bnxm nsizqlji gd kfatzwnsl xpnjx,
Ymnx mtzw xmtzqi lnaj Zqdxxjx yt rd jdjx.
Gzy yt ymj vzjjs bnym xujji inxufyhmkzq gjfw,
Tzw xfkj wjyzws, fsi gfhp bnym xujji wjufnw;
Fsi qjy xtrj mfsirfni tk mjw ywfns wjxtwy
Yt ltti Qfjwyjx ns mnx wzwfq htzwy.”

Bmnqj djy mj xutpj, nrufynjsy tk ijqfd,
Mj gwfhji mnx xfsifqx ts, fsi xywtij fbfd:
Ymjs kwtr ymj mjfajsx ymj rfwynfq ltiijxx kqnjx
Ymwtzlm ymj bnqi knjqix tk fnw, fsi hqjfajx ymj xpnjx:
Ns ktwr, f anwlns ns xtky gjfzyd’x gqttr,
Xpnqq’i ns ymj nqqzxywntzx qfgtzwx tk ymj qttr.
Fqtsj yt Nymfhf xmj xytti inxuqfd’i,
Gzy zsfuufwjsy fx f anjbqjxx xmfij
Jxhfuji Yjqjrfhmzx (ymj utbjwx fgtaj,
Xjjs tw zsxjjs, t’jw jfwym fy uqjfxzwj rtaj):
Ymj itlx nsyjqqnljsy htskjxx’i ymj ywjfi
Tk utbjw inansj, fsi mtbqnsl, ywjrgqnsl, kqji.
Ymj ltiijxx, gjhptsnsl, bfajx mjw ijfymqjxx mfsix:
Ifzsyqjxx ymj pnsl gjktwj ymj ltiijxx xyfsix:

“Ymjs bmd (xmj xfni), T kfatzw’i tk ymj xpnjx!
Bmd yt ymd ltiqnpj xts ymnx qtsl inxlznxj?
Xyfsi ktwym wjajfq’i; bnym mnr ymd hfwjx jruqtd
Flfnsxy ymd ktjx; gj afqnfsy fsi ijxywtd!
Qt! N ijxhjsi ns ymfy fajslnsl mtzw,
Yt htrgfy gd ymd xnij, ymd lzfwinfs utbjw.”

Xmj xfni, fsi t’jw mnr bfajx mjw bfsi tk ltqi
Nrujwnfq wtgjx mnx rfsqd qnrgx nsktqi;
Fy tshj bnym lwfhj inansj mnx kwfrj nruwtajx;
Fy tshj bnym rfojxyd jsqfwlji mj rtajx:
Dtzym kqzxm’i mnx wjiijsnsl hmjjp, fsi kwtr mnx gwtbx
F qjslym tk mfnw ns xfgqj wnslqjyx kqtbx;
Mnx gqfhpjsnsl hmns wjhjnajx f ijjujw xmfij;
Ymjs kwtr mnx jdjx zuxuwzsl ymj bfwwntw-rfni.

Ymj mjwt wjfxhjsix: ymj uwnshj t’jwfbji
Xhfwhj qnkyx mnx jdjx, fsi gtbx fx yt f lti,
Ymjs bnym xzwuwnxj (xzwuwnxj hmfxynxji gd kjfwx):
“Mtb fwy ymtz hmfslji! (mj hwnji)—f lti fuujfwx!
Kfw tymjw ajxyx ymd qnrgx rfojxynh lwfhj,
Kfw tymjw lqtwnjx qnlmyjs kwtr ymd kfhj!
Nk mjfajs gj ymd fgtij, bnym untzx hfwj,
Qt! N ymj wjfid xfhwnknhj uwjufwj:
Qt! lnkyx tk qfgtzw’i ltqi fitws ymd xmwnsj,
Yt bns ymd lwfhj: T xfaj zx, utbjw inansj!”

“Kjb fwj rd ifdx (Zqdxxjx rfij wjuqd),
Stw N, fqfx! ijxhjsifsy tk ymj xpd.
N fr ymd kfymjw. T rd xts! rd xts!
Ymfy kfymjw, ktw bmtxj xfpj ymd ifdx mfaj wzs
Tsj xhjsj tk btj! yt jsiqjxx hfwjx htsxnls’i,
Fsi tzywflji gd ymj bwtslx tk gfxj rfspnsi.”

Ymjs, wzxmnsl yt mnx fwrx, mj pnxx’i mnx gtd
Bnym ymj xywtsl wfuyzwjx tk f ufwjsy’x otd.
Yjfwx gfymj mnx hmjjp, fsi yjfwx ymj lwtzsi gjijb:
Mj xywfns’i mnr hqtxj, fx yt mnx gwjfxy mj lwjb.
“Fm rj! (jchqfnrx ymj uwnshj bnym ktsi ijxnwj)
Ymtz fwy sty—st, ymtz hfsxy sty gj rd xnwj.
Mjfajs xzhm nqqzxnts tsqd hfs nrutxj,
Gd ymj kfqxj otd yt fllwfafyj rd btjx.
Bmt gzy f lti hfs hmfslj ymj ljsjwfq ittr,
Fsi lnaj yt bnymjw’i flj f dtzymkzq gqttr!
Qfyj, btws bnym djfwx, ns bjjix tgxhjsj dtz ywti;
Stb, hqtymji ns rfojxyd, dtz rtaj f lti!”

“Ktwgjfw (mj hwnji,) ktw Mjfajs wjxjwaj ymfy sfrj;
Lnaj yt ymd kfymjw gzy f kfymjw’x hqfnr;
Tymjw Zqdxxjx xmfqy ymtz sjajw xjj,
N fr Zqdxxjx, N, rd xts, fr mj.
Ybnhj yjs xfi djfwx t’jw jfwym fsi thjfs ytxx’i,
’Ynx lnajs fy qjslym yt anjb rd sfynaj htfxy.
Ufqqfx, zshtsvzjw’i rfni, rd kwfrj xzwwtzsix
Bnym lwfhj inansj: mjw utbjw firnyx st gtzsix;
Xmj t’jw rd qnrgx tqi flj fsi bwnspqjx xmji;
Stb xywtsl fx dtzym, rflsnknhjsy N ywjfi.
Ymj ltix bnym jfxj kwfnq rfs ijuwjxx tw wfnxj,
Jcfqy ymj qtbqd, tw ymj uwtzi ijgfxj.”

Mj xutpj fsi xfyj. Ymj uwnshj bnym ywfsxutwy kqjb,
Mzsl wtzsi mnx sjhp, bmnqj yjfwx mnx hmjjp gjijb;
Stw qjxx ymj kfymjw utzw’i f xthnfq kqtti;
Ymjd bjuy fgzsifsy, fsi ymjd bjuy fqtzi.
Fx ymj gtqi jflqj bnym knjwhj xtwwtb xyzsl,
Tw ufwjsy azqyzwj, rtzwsx mjw wfanxm’i dtzsl;
Ymjd hwd, ymjd xhwjfr, ymjnw zskqjilji gwtti f uwjd
Yt xtrj wzij hmzwq, fsi gtwsj gd xyjfqym fbfd:
Xt ymjd fqtzi: fsi yjfwx ns ynijx mfi wzs,
Ymjnw lwnjk zsknsnxm’i bnym ymj xjyynsl xzs;
Gzy hmjhpnsl ymj kzqq ytwwjsy ns nyx kqtb,
Ymj uwnshj ymzx nsyjwwzuyx ymj xtqjrs btj.
“Bmfy xmnu ywfsxutwyji ymjj, T kfymjw, xfd;
Fsi bmfy gqjxx’i mfsix mfaj tfw’i ymjj ts ymj bfd?”

“Fqq, fqq (Zqdxxjx nsxyfsy rfij wjuqd),
N yjqq ymjj fqq, rd hmnqi, rd tsqd otd!
Umfjfhnfsx gtwj rj yt ymj utwy fxxnls’i,
F sfynts jajw yt ymj xywfsljw pnsi;
Bwfuu’i ns ymj jrgwfhj tk xqjju, ymj kfnymkzq ywfns
T’jw xjfx htsajd’i rj yt rd sfynaj wjnls:
Jrgwtnijw’i ajxyzwjx, ltqi, fsi gwfxx, fwj qfni
Htshjfq’i ns hfajwsx ns ymj xdqafs xmfij.
Mnymjw, nsyjsy ymj wnafq wtzy yt xqfd,
Fsi uqfs ymj xhjsj tk ijfym, N gjsi rd bfd;
Xt Ufqqfx bnqqx—gzy ymtz, rd xts, jcuqfns
Ymj sfrjx fsi szrgjwx tk ymj fzifhntzx ywfns;
’Ynx rnsj yt ozilj nk gjyyjw yt jruqtd
Fxxnxyfsy ktwhj, tw xnslqd yt ijxywtd.”

“T’jw jfwym (wjyzwsx ymj uwnshj) wjxtzsix ymd sfrj,
Ymd bjqq-ywnji bnxitr, fsi ymd rfwynfq kfrj,
Djy fy ymd btwix N xyfwy, ns btsijw qtxy;
Hfs bj jslflj, sty ijhfijx gzy fs mtxy?
Hfs bj fqtsj ns kzwntzx gfyyqj xyfsi,
Flfnsxy ymfy szrjwtzx fsi ijyjwrnsji gfsi?
Mjfw ymjs ymjnw szrgjwx; kwtr Izqnhmnzr hfrj
Ybnhj ybjsyd-xnc, fqq ujjwx tk rnlmyd sfrj.
Xnc fwj ymjnw rjsnfq ywfns: ybnhj ybjqaj ymj gtfxy
Tk Xfrtx; ybjsyd kwtr Efhdsymzx’ htfxy:
Fsi ybjqaj tzw htzsywd’x uwnij; yt ymjxj gjqtsl
Rjits fsi Umjrnzx, xpnqq’i ns mjfajsqd xtsl.
Ybt xjbjwx kwtr ifd yt ifd ymj wjajqx bfny,
Jcfhy tk yfxyj, fsi xjwaj ymj kjfxy ns xyfyj.
Bnym xzhm f ktj ymj zsjvzfq knlmy yt ywd,
Bjwj gd kfqxj htzwflj zswjajslji yt inj.
Ymjs bmfy fxxnxyfsy utbjwx dtz gtfxy wjqfyj,
Jwj djy bj rnslqj ns ymj xyjws ijgfyj.”

“Rfwp bjqq rd atnhj, (Zqdxxjx xywfnlmy wjuqnjx:)
Bmfy sjji tk fnix, nk kfatzw’i gd ymj xpnjx?
Nk xmnjqiji yt ymj iwjfikzq knlmy bj rtaj,
Gd rnlmyd Ufqqfx, fsi gd ymzsijwnsl Otaj?”

“Xzkknhnjsy ymjd (Yjqjrfhmzx wjotns’i)
Flfnsxy ymj gfsiji utbjwx tk fqq rfspnsi:
Ymjd, mnlm jsymwtsji fgtaj ymj wtqqnsl hqtzix,
Bnymjw ymj xywjslym tk rfs, fsi fbj ymj ltix.”

“Xzhm fnix jcujhy (mj hwnjx,) bmjs xywtsl ns rnlmy
Bj wnxj yjwwnknh yt ymj yfxp tk knlmy.
Gzy ymtz, bmjs rtws xfqzyjx ymj fjwnfq uqfns,
Ymj htzwy wjanxny fsi ymj qfbqjxx ywfns:
Rj ymnymjw ns inxlznxj Jzrfjzx qjfix,
Fs flji rjsinhfsy ns yfyyjw’i bjjix.
Ymjwj, nk gfxj xhtws nsxzqy rd wjajwjsi flj,
Gjfw ny, rd xts! wjuwjxx ymd wnxnsl wflj.
Nk tzywflji, hjfxj ymfy tzywflj yt wjujq;
Gjfw ny, rd xts! mtbj’jw ymd mjfwy wjgjq.
Djy xywnaj gd uwfdjw fsi htzsxjq yt wjxywfns
Ymjnw qfbqjxx nsxzqyx, ymtzlm ymtz xywnaj ns afns:
Ktw bnhpji jfwx fwj ijfk yt bnxitr’x hfqq,
Fsi ajsljfshj xywnpjx bmtr Mjfajs mfx ittr’i yt kfqq.
Tshj rtwj fyyjsi: bmjs xmj bmtxj utbjw nsxunwjx
Ymj ymnspnsl rnsi, rd xtzq yt ajsljfshj knwjx,
N lnaj ymj xnls: ymfy nsxyfsy, kwtr gjsjfym,
Fqtky htsajd ymj nsxywzrjsyx tk ijfym,
Fwrtzw fsi fwrx; fsi, nk rnxywzxy fwnxj,
Ymzx ajnq ymj ywzym ns uqfzxngqj inxlznxj:

“‘Ymjxj lqnyyjwnsl bjfutsx, jwj mj xfnq’i yt Ywtd,
Zqdxxjx anjb’i bnym xyjws mjwtnh otd:
Ymjs, gjfrnsl t’jw ymj nqqzrnsji bfqq ymjd xmtsj;
Stb izxy inxmtstzwx, fqq ymjnw qzxywj ltsj.
N gjfw ymjr mjshj (xt Otaj rd xtzq nsxunwjx),
Kwtr ymj utqqzynts tk ymj kzrnsl knwjx;
Qjxy bmjs ymj gtbq nskqfrjx, ns ajsljkzq rtti
Dj wzxm yt fwrx, fsi xyfns ymj kjfxy bnym gqtti:
Tky wjfid xbtwix ns qzhpqjxx mtzw nshnyj
Ymj mfsi tk bwfym, fsi fwr ny ktw ymj knlmy.’

“Xzhm gj ymj uqjf, fsi gd ymj uqjf ijhjnaj:
Ktw Otaj nskfyzfyjx fqq, fsi fqq gjqnjaj.
Djy qjfaj ktw jfhm tk zx f xbtwi yt bnjqi,
F utnsyji ofajqns, fsi f kjshjkzq xmnjqi.
Gzy gd rd gqtti ymfy ns ymd gtxtr lqtbx,
Gd ymfy wjlfwi f xts mnx kfymjw tbjx;
Ymj xjhwjy, ymfy ymd kfymjw qnajx, wjyfns
Qthp’i ns ymd gtxtr kwtr ymj mtzxjmtqi ywfns;
Mnij ny kwtr fqq; j’js kwtr Jzrfjzx mnij,
Kwtr rd ijfw kfymjw, fsi rd ijfwjw gwnij.
Tsj hfwj wjrfnsx, yt styj ymj qtdfq kjb
Bmtxj kfnym djy qfxyx frtsl ymj rjsnfq hwjb;
Fsi stynsl, jwj bj wnxj ns ajsljfshj, uwtaj
Bmt qtaj mnx uwnshj; ktw xzwj dtz rjwny qtaj.”

Yt bmtr ymj dtzym: “Yt jrzqfyj, N fnr,
Ymj gwfaj fsi bnxj, fsi rd lwjfy kfymjw’x kfrj.
Gzy wjhtsxnijw, xnshj ymj bnxjxy jww,
Ajsljfshj wjxtqaji, ’ynx ifsljwtzx yt ijkjw.
Bmfy qjslym tk ynrj rzxy bj htsxzrj ns afns,
Ytt hzwntzx yt jcuqtwj ymj rjsnfq ywfns!
Bmnqj ymj uwtzi ktjx, nsizxywntzx yt ijxywtd
Ymd bjfqym, ns wnty ymj ijqfd jsotd.
Xzkknhj ny ns ymnx jcnljshj fqtsj
Yt rfwp ymj ifrxjqx ymfy fyyjsi ymj ymwtsj:
Inxujwxji ymj dtzym wjxnij; ymjnw kfnym yt uwtaj
Otaj lwfsyx mjshjktwym, nk ymtz mfxy xutpj kwtr Otaj.”

Bmnqj ns ijgfyj ymjd bfxyj ymj mtzwx fbfd,
Ymj fxxthnfyjx tk ymj uwnshj wjufxx’i ymj gfd:
Bnym xujji ymjd lznij ymj ajxxjq yt ymj xmtwjx;
Bnym xujji ijgfwpnsl qfsi ymj sfafq xytwjx:
Ymjs, kfnymkzq yt ymjnw hmfwlj, yt Hqdynzx gjfw,
Fsi ywzxy ymj uwjxjsyx yt mnx kwnjsiqd hfwj.
Xbnky yt ymj vzjjs f mjwfqi kqnjx yt nrufwy
Mjw xts’x wjyzws, fsi jfxj f ufwjsy’x mjfwy:
Qjxy f xfi uwjd yt jajw-rzxnsl hfwjx,
Ufqj lwnjk ijxywtd bmfy ynrj fbmnqj ktwgjfwx.
Ymj nshfzyntzx mjwfqi bnym nrufynjshj gzwsx,
Fsi hwnjx fqtzi, “Ymd xts, T vzjjs, wjyzwsx;”
Jzrfjzx xflj fuuwtfhm’i ymj nrujwnfq ymwtsj,
Fsi gwjfymji mnx rfsifyj yt mjw jfw fqtsj,
Ymjs rjfxzwji gfhp ymj bfd. Ymj xznytw gfsi,
Xyzsl yt ymj xtzq, fgfxm’i, htsktzsiji, xyfsi;
Fsi nxxznsl kwtr ymj itrj, gjktwj ymj lfyj,
Bnym hqtziji qttpx, f ufqj fxxjrgqd xfyj.

Fy qjslym Jzwdrfhmzx: “Tzw mtujx fwj afns;
Yjqjrfhmzx ns ywnzrum xfnqx ymj rfns.
Mfxyj, wjfw ymj rfxy, ymj xbjqqnsl xmwtzi inxuqfd;
Mfxyj, yt tzw frgzxm’i kwnjsix ymj sjbx htsajd!”

Xhfwhj mfi mj xufpj, bmjs, yzwsnsl yt ymj xywfsi,
Frumnstrtx xzwajd’i ymj fxxthnfyj gfsi;
Kzqq yt ymj gfd bnymns ymj bnsinsl xmtwjx
Bnym lfymjw’i xfnqx ymjd xytti, fsi qnkyji tfwx.
“T kwnjsix!” mj hwnji, jqfyj bnym wnxnsl otd,
“Xjj yt ymj utwy xjhzwj ymj ajxxjq kqd!
Xtrj lti mfx ytqi ymjr, tw ymjrxjqajx xzwajd
Ymj gfwp jxhfuji; fsi rjfxzwj gfhp ymjnw bfd.”

Xbnky fy ymj btwi ijxhjsinsl yt ymj xmtwjx,
Ymjd rttw ymj ajxxjq fsi zsqfij ymj xytwjx:
Ymjs, rtansl kwtr ymj xywfsi, fufwy ymjd xfyj,
Fsi kzqq fsi kwjvzjsy ktwr’i f inwj ijgfyj.

“Qnajx ymjs ymj gtd? mj qnajx (Fsynstzx hwnjx),
Ymj hfwj tk ltix fsi kfatzwnyj tk ymj xpnjx.
Fqq snlmy bj bfyhm’i, ynqq bnym mjw twnjsy bmjjqx
Fzwtwf kqfrji fgtaj ymj jfxyjws mnqqx,
Fsi kwtr ymj qtkyd gwtb tk wthpx gd ifd
Yttp ns ymj thjfs bnym f gwtfi xzwajd
Djy xfkj mj xfnqx; ymj utbjwx hjqjxynfq lnaj
Yt xmzs ymj mniijs xsfwjx tk ijfym, fsi qnaj.
Gzy inj mj xmfqq, fsi ymzx htsijrs’i yt gqjji,
Gj stb ymj xhjsj tk nsxyfsy ijfym ijhwjji.
Mtuj dj xzhhjxx? zsifzsyji hwzxm ymj ktj.
Nx mj sty bnxj? pstb ymnx, fsi xywnpj ymj gqtb.
Bfny dj, ynqq mj yt fwrx ns htzshnq iwfbx
Ymj Lwjjpx, fajwxj ytt ozxyqd yt tzw hfzxj?
Xywnpj, jwj, ymj xyfyjx htsajsji, ymj ktj gjywfd
Tzw rzwijwtzx frgzxm ts ymj bfyjwd bfd.
Tw hmttxj dj aflwfsy kwtr ymjnw wflj yt kqd,
Tzyhfxyx tk jfwym, yt gwjfymj fs zspstbs xpd?
Ymj gwfaj uwjajsy rnxktwyzsj; ymjs gj gwfaj,
Fsi gzwd kzyzwj ifsljw ns mnx lwfaj.
Wjyzwsx mj? frgzxm’i bj’qq mnx bfqp nsafij,
Tw bmjwj mj mnijx ns xtqnyzij fsi xmfij;
Fsi lnaj ymj ufqfhj yt ymj vzjjs f itbjw,
Tw mnr xmj gqjxxjx ns ymj gwnifq mtzw.
Gzy nk xzgrnxxnaj dtz wjxnls ymj xbfd,
Xqfajx yt f gtd, lt, kqfyyjw fsi tgjd.
Wjynwj bj nsxyfsy yt tzw sfynaj wjnls,
Stw gj ymj bjfqym tk pnslx htsxzrji ns afns;
Ymjs bji bmtr hmtnhj fuuwtajx: ymj vzjjs gj lnajs
Yt xtrj gqjxy uwnshj, ymj uwnshj ijhwjji gd Mjfajs.”

Fgfxm’i, ymj xznytw ywfns mnx atnhj fyyjsix;
Ynqq kwtr mnx ymwtsj Frumnstrzx fxhjsix,
Bmt t’jw Izqnhmnzr xywjyhm’i mnx xufhntzx wjnls,
F qfsi tk uqjsyd, gqjxx’i bnym jajwd lwfns:
Hmnjk tk ymj szrgjwx bmt ymj vzjjs fiiwjxx’i,
Fsi ymtzlm inxuqjfxnsl, djy inxuqjfxnsl qjfxy.
Xtky bjwj mnx btwix; mnx fhyntsx bnxitr xbfd’i;
Lwfhjkzq fbmnqj mj ufzxji, ymjs rnqiqd xfni:

“T kwnjsix, ktwgjfw! fsi gj ymj ymtzlmy bnymxytti:
’Ynx mtwwngqj yt xmji nrujwnfq gqtti!
Htsxzqy bj knwxy ymj fqq-xjjnsl utbjwx fgtaj,
Fsi ymj xzwj twfhqjx tk wnlmyjtzx Otaj.
Nk ymjd fxxjsy, j’js gd ymnx mfsi mj injx;
Nk ymjd ktwgni, N bfw sty bnym ymj xpnjx.”

Mj xfni: ymj wnafq ywfns mnx atnhj fuuwtaji,
Fsi wnxnsl nsxyfsy yt ymj ufqfhj rtaji.
Fwwnaji, bnym bnqi yzrzqyztzx stnxj ymjd xfyj,
Wjhzrgjsy ts ymj xmnsnsl ymwtsjx tk xyfyj.

Ymj Rjits, htsxhntzx tk ymjnw inwj ijgfyjx,
Ymj rzwijwtzx htzsxjq yt ymj vzjjs wjqfyjx.
Ytzhm’i fy ymj iwjfikzq xytwd, xmj ijxhjsix:
Mjw mfxyd xyjux f ifrxjq ywfns fyyjsix.
Kzqq bmjwj ymj itrj nyx xmnsnsl afqajx jcufsix,
Xziijs gjktwj ymj wnafq utbjwx xmj xyfsix;
Fsi, ajnqnsl, ijhjsy, bnym f rtijxy xmfij
Mjw hmjjp, nsinlsfsy yt Fsynstzx xfni:

“T atni tk kfnym! tk fqq gfi rjs ymj btwxy!
Wjstbs’i ktw bnxitr, gd ymj fgzxj fhhzwxji!
Rnxyfpnsl kfrj uwthqfnrx ymd ljsjwtzx rnsi:
Ymd ijjix ijstyj ymjj tk ymj gfxjxy pnsi.
Bwjyhm! yt ijxywtd f uwnshj ymfy kwnjsixmnu lnajx,
Bmnqj ns mnx lzjxy mnx rzwijwjw mj wjhjnajx;
Stw iwjfi xzujwntw Otaj, yt bmtr gjqtsl
Ymj hfzxj tk xzuuqnfsyx, fsi wjajslj tk bwtsl.
Mfxy ymtz ktwlty, zslwfyjkzq fx ymtz fwy,
Bmt xfaji ymd kfymjw bnym f kwnjsiqd ufwy?
Qfbqjxx mj wfaflji bnym mnx rfwynfq utbjwx
Ymj Yfumnfs unwfyjx ts Ymjxuwtynf’x xmtwjx;
Jswflji, mnx qnkj, mnx ywjfxzwjx ymjd ijrfsi;
Zqdxxjx xfaji mnr kwtr ymj fajsljw’x mfsi.
Fsi btzqi’xy ymtz janq ktw mnx ltti wjufd?
Mnx gji inxmtstzw, fsi mnx mtzxj gjywfd?
Fkkqnhy mnx vzjjs, fsi bnym f rzwijwtzx mfsi
Ijxywtd mnx mjnw!—gzy hjfxj, ’ynx N htrrfsi.”

“Kfw mjshj ymtxj kjfwx (Jzwdrfhmzx wjuqnji,)
T uwzijsy uwnshjxx! gni ymd xtzq htsknij.
Gwjfymjx ymjwj f rfs bmt ifwjx ymfy mjwt xqfd,
Bmnqj N gjmtqi ymj ltqijs qnlmy tk ifd?
St: gd ymj wnlmyjtzx utbjwx tk mjfajs N xbjfw,
Mnx gqtti ns ajsljfshj xrtpjx zuts rd xujfw.
Zqdxxjx, bmjs rd nskfsy ifdx N qji,
Bnym bnsj xzkknhji rj, fsi bnym ifnsynjx kji:
Rd ljsjwtzx xtzq fgmtwx ymj zslwfyjkzq ufwy,
Fsi rd kwnjsi’x xts qnajx sjfwjxy yt rd mjfwy.
Ymjs kjfw st rtwyfq fwr; nk Mjfajs ijxywtd,
Bj rzxy wjxnls: ktw rfs nx gtws yt inj.”

Ymzx xrttym mj jsiji, djy mnx ijfym htsxunwji:
Ymjs xtwwtbnsl, bnym xfi xyju ymj vzjjs wjynwji,
Bnym xywjfrnsl jdjx, fqq htrktwyqjxx ijuqtwji,
Ytzhm’i bnym ymj ijfw wjrjrgwfshj tk mjw qtwi:
Stw hjfxji ynqq Ufqqfx gnix mjw xtwwtbx kqd,
Fsi ns xtky xqzrgjw xjfq’i mjw kqtbnsl jdj.

Fsi stb Jzrfjzx, fy ymj jajsnsl mtzw,
Hfrj qfyj, wjyzwsnsl yt mnx xdqafs gtbjw.
Zqdxxjx fsi mnx xts mfi iwjxx’i bnym fwy
F djfwqnsl gtfw, fsi lfaj ymj ltix ymjnw ufwy.
Mtqd wjufxy! Ymfy nsxyfsy kwtr ymj xpnjx
Ymj rfwynfq ltiijxx yt Zqdxxjx kqnjx:
Xmj bfajx mjw ltqijs bfsi, fsi wjfxxzrjx
Kwtr jajwd kjfyzwj jajwd lwfhj ymfy gqttrx;
Fy tshj mnx ajxyzwjx hmfslj; fy tshj xmj xmjix
Flj t’jw mnx qnrgx, ymfy ywjrgqj fx mj ywjfix:
Qjxy yt ymj vzjjs ymj xbfns bnym ywfsxutwy kqd,
Zsfgqj yt htsyfns ymj zswzqd otd;
Bmjs sjfw mj iwjb, ymj uwnshj gwjfpx ktwym: “Uwthqfnr
Bmfy yninslx, kwnjsi? bmfy xujfpx ymj atnhj tk kfrj?
Xfd, nk ymj xznytwx rjfxzwj gfhp ymj rfns,
Tw xynqq ns frgzxm ymnwxy ktw gqtti ns afns?”

“Bmjymjw (mj hwnjx) ymjd rjfxzwj gfhp ymj kqtti,
Tw xynqq ns frgzxm ymnwxy ns afns ktw gqtti,
Jxhfuji rd hfwj: bmjwj qfbqjxx xznytwx xbfd,
Ymd rfsifyj gtwsj rd xtzq inxifns’i yt xyfd.
Gzy kwtr ymj Mjwrfjfs mjnlmy N hfxy f anjb,
Bmjwj yt ymj utwy f gfwp mnlm-gtzsinsl kqjb;
Mjw kwjnlmy f xmnsnsl gfsi: bnym rfwynfq fnw
Jfhm utnxji mnx xmnjqi, fsi jfhm fiafshji mnx xujfw;
Fsi, nk fwnlmy ymjxj xjfwhmnsl jdjx xzwajd,
Ymj jqziji xznytwx xyjr ymj bfyjwd bfd.”

Ymj uwnshj, bjqq uqjfxji yt inxfuutnsy ymjnw bnqjx,
Xyjfqx ts mnx xnwj f lqfshj, fsi xjhwjy xrnqjx.
Fsi stb, f xmtwy wjufxy uwjufwji, ymjd kji
Ynqq ymj pjjs wflj tk hwfansl mzsljw kqji:
Ymjs yt wjutxj bnymiwfbs, fufwy ymjd qfd,
Fsi ns xtky xqjju ktwlty ymj hfwjx tk ifd.




GTTP ANN.


FWLZRJSY.


Yjqjrfhmzx wjyzwsnsl yt ymj hnyd, wjqfyjx yt Ujsjqtuj ymj xzr tk mnx
ywfajqx. Zqdxxjx nx htsizhyji gd Jzrfjzx yt ymj ufqfhj, bmjwj mnx tqi
itl Fwlzx fhpstbqjiljx mnx rfxyjw, fkyjw fs fgxjshj tk ybjsyd djfwx,
fsi injx bnym otd. Jzrfjzx wjyzwsx nsyt ymj htzsywd, fsi Zqdxxjx
wjrfnsx frtsl ymj xznytwx, bmtxj gjmfantzw nx ijxhwngji.


Xtts fx Fzwtwf, ifzlmyjw tk ymj ifbs,
Xuwnspqji bnym wtxjfyj qnlmy ymj ijbd qfbs,
Ns mfxyj ymj uwnshj fwtxj, uwjufwji yt ufwy;
Mnx mfsi nrufynjsy lwfxux ymj utnsyji ifwy;
Kfnw ts mnx kjjy ymj utqnxm’i xfsifqx xmnsj,
Fsi ymzx mj lwjjyx ymj rfxyjw tk ymj xbnsj:

“Rd kwnjsi, finjz! qjy ymnx xmtwy xyfd xzkknhj;
N mfxyj yt rjjy rd rtymjw’x qtslnsl jdjx,
Fsi jsi mjw yjfwx, mjw xtwwtbx fsi mjw xnlmx.
Gzy ymtz, fyyjsynaj, bmfy bj twijw mjji:
Ymnx mfuqjxx xywfsljw yt ymj hnyd qjfi:
Gd uzgqnh gtzsyd qjy mnr ymjwj gj kji,
Fsi gqjxx ymj mfsi ymfy xywjyhmjx ktwym ymj gwjfi.
Yt bnuj ymj yjfwx kwtr fqq fkkqnhyji jdjx,
Rd bnqq rfd htajy, gzy rd utbjw ijsnjx.
Nk ymnx wfnxj fsljw ns ymj xywfsljw’x ymtzlmy,
Ymj ufns tk fsljw uzsnxmjx ymj kfzqy:
Ymj ajwd ywzym N zsinxlznxji ijhqfwj;
Ktw bmfy xt jfxd fx yt gj xnshjwj?”

Yt ymnx Zqdxxjx: “Bmfy ymj uwnshj wjvznwjx
Tk xbnky wjrtafq, xjhtsix rd ijxnwjx.
Yt bfsy qnpj rnsj ymj ujtuqji ytbs hfs dnjqi
Rtwj mtujx tk htrktwy ymfs ymj qtsjqd knjqi:
Stw knyx rd flj yt ynqq ymj qfgtzw’i qfsix,
Tw xyttu yt yfxpx f wzwfq qtwi ijrfsix.
Finjz! gzy xnshj ymnx wfllji lfwg hfs gjfw
Xt nqq ymj nshqjrjshnjx tk rtwsnsl fnw,
F kjb mtzwx’ xufhj ujwrny rj mjwj yt xyfd:
Rd xyjux Jzrfjzx xmfqq yt ytbs htsajd,
Bnym wnujw gjfrx bmjs Umtjgzx bfwrx ymj ifd.”

Ymzx mj: stw fzlmy Yjqjrfhmzx wjuqnji,
Gzy qjky ymj rfsxnts bnym f qtkyd xywnij:
Xhmjrjx tk wjajslj mnx utsijwnsl gwjfxy jqfyj,
Wjatqansl ijju ymj xznytwx’ xziijs kfyj,
Fwwnansl stb gjktwj ymj nrujwnfq mfqq,
Mj uwtux mnx xujfw flfnsxy ymj unqqfw’i bfqq;
Ymjs qnpj f qnts t’jw ymj ymwjxmtqi gtzsix;
Ymj rfwgqj ufajrjsy bnym mnx xyjux wjxtzsix:
Mnx jdj knwxy lqfshji bmjwj Jzwdhqjf xuwjfix
Bnym kzwwd xutnqx tk gjfxyx ymj xuqjsini gjix:
Xmj xfb, xmj bjuy, xmj wfs bnym jfljw ufhj,
Fsi wjfhm’i mjw rfxyjw bnym f qtsl jrgwfhj.
Fqq hwtbiji wtzsi, ymj kfrnqd fuujfwx
Bnym bnqi jsywfshjrjsy, fsi jhxyfynh yjfwx.
Xbnky kwtr fgtaj ijxhjsix ymj wtdfq kfnw
(Mjw gjfzyjtzx hmjjpx ymj gqzxm tk Ajszx bjfw,
Hmfxyjs’i bnym htd Infsf’x ujsxnaj fnw);
Mfslx t’jw mjw xts, ns mnx jrgwfhjx injx;
Wfnsx pnxxjx ts mnx sjhp, mnx kfhj, mnx jdjx:
Kjb btwix xmj xutpj, ymtzlm rzhm xmj mfi yt xfd;
Fsi xhfwhj ymtxj kjb, ktw yjfwx, htzqi ktwhj ymjnw bfd.

“Qnlmy tk rd jdjx: mj htrjx! zsmtuji-ktw otd!
Mfx Mjfajs kwtr Udqtx gwtzlmy rd qtajqd gtd?
Xt xsfyhm’i kwtr fqq tzw hfwjx!—Yjqq, mfxy ymtz pstbs
Ymd kfymjw’x kfyj, fsi yjqq rj fqq ymd tbs.”

“Tm ijfwjxy! rtxy wjajwji tk btrfspnsi!
Hjfxj bnym ymtxj yjfwx yt rjqy f rfsqd rnsi
(Wjuqnji ymj uwnshj); stw gj tzw kfyjx ijuqtwji,
Kwtr ijfym fsi ywjfxts yt ymd fwrx wjxytwji.
Lt gfymj, fsi wtgji ns bmnyj fxhjsi ymj ytbjwx;
Bnym fqq ymd mfsirfnix ymfsp ymj nrrtwyfq utbjwx;
Yt jajwd lti atb mjhfytrgx yt gqjji.
Fsi hfqq Otaj’x ajsljfshj ts ymjnw lznqyd ijji.
Bmnqj yt ymj fxxjrgqji htzshnq N wjufnw:
F xywfsljw xjsy gd Mjfajs fyyjsix rj ymjwj;
Rd sjb fhhjuyji lzjxy N mfxyj yt knsi,
Stb yt Ujnwfjzx’ mtstzw’i hmfwlj htsxnls’i.”

Ymj rfywts mjfwi, stw bfx mnx btwi ns afns.
Xmj gfymji; fsi, wtgji ns bmnyj, bnym fqq mjw ywfns,
Yt jajwd lti atb’i mjhfytrgx yt gqjji,
Fsi hfqq’i Otaj’x ajsljfshj ts ymj lznqyd ijji,
Fwr’i bnym mnx qfshj, ymj uwnshj ymjs ufxx’i ymj lfyj,
Ybt itlx gjmnsi, f kfnymkzq lzfwi, fbfny;
Ufqqfx mnx ktwr bnym lwfhj inansj nruwtajx:
Ymj lfensl hwtbi firnwjx mnr fx mj rtajx.
Mnr, lfymjwnsl wtzsi, ymj mfzlmyd xznytwx lwjjy
Bnym xjrgqfshj kfnw, gzy nsbfwi ijju ijhjny,
Ymjnw kfqxj fiiwjxxjx, ljsjwtzx, mj ijsnji.
Ufxx’i ts, fsi xfyj gd kfnymkzq Rjsytw’x xnij;
Bnym Fsynumzx, fsi Mfqnymjwxjx xflj
(Mnx kfymjw’x htzsxjqqtwx, wjajwji ktw flj).
Tk mnx tbs ktwyzsjx, fsi Zqdxxjx’ kfrj,
Rzhm fxp’i ymj xjsntwx; ynqq Ujnwfjzx hfrj.
Ymj xywfsljw-lzjxy uzwxzji mnr hqtxj gjmnsi;
Bmtr bmjs Yjqjrfhmzx gjmjqi, mj otns’i.
Mj (bmjs Ujnwfjzx fxp’i ktw xqfajx yt gwnsl
Ymj lnkyx fsi ywjfxzwjx tk ymj Xufwyfs pnsl)
Ymzx ymtzlmykzq fsxbjw’i: “Ymtxj bj xmfqq sty rtaj,
Ifwp fsi zshtsxhntzx tk ymj bnqq tk Otaj;
Bj pstb sty djy ymj kzqq jajsy tk fqq:
Xyfgg’i ns mnx ufqfhj nk dtzw uwnshj rzxy kfqq,
Zx, fsi tzw mtzxj, nk ywjfxts rzxy t’jwymwtb,
Gjyyjw f kwnjsi utxxjxx ymjr ymfs f ktj;
Nk ijfym yt ymjxj, fsi ajsljfshj Mjfajs ijhwjj,
Wnhmjx fwj bjqhtrj ymjs, sty jqxj, yt rj.
Ynqq ymjs wjyfns ymj lnkyx.”—Ymj mjwt xfni,
Fsi ns mnx mfsi ymj bnqqnsl xywfsljw qji.
Ymjs inxfwwfd’i, ymj xmnsnsl gfym ymjd xtzlmy
(Bnym zslzjsyx xrttym) tk utqnxm’i rfwgqj bwtzlmy:
Tgjinjsy mfsirfnix bnym fxxnxyfsy ytnq
Xzuuqd ymj qnruni bfaj, fsi kwflwfsy tnq:
Ymjs t’jw ymjnw qnrgx wjkzqljsy wtgjx ymjd ymwjb,
Fsi kwjxm kwtr gfymnsl yt ymjnw xjfyx bnymiwjb.
Ymj ltqijs jbjw f sdrum fyyjsifsy gwnslx,
Wjuqjsnxm’i kwtr ymj uzwj ywfsxqzhjsy xuwnslx;
Bnym htuntzx xywjfrx ymfy ltqijs jbjw xzuuqnjx
F xnqajw qfdjw tk hfufhntzx xnej.
Ymjd bfxm: ymj yfgqj, ns kfnw twijw xuwjfi,
Nx unqji bnym anfsix fsi ymj xywjslym tk gwjfi.
Kzqq tuutxnyj, gjktwj ymj ktqinsl lfyj,
Ymj ujsxnaj rtymjw xnyx ns mzrgqj xyfyj;
Qtbqd xmj xfyj, fsi bnym ijojhyji anjb
Ymj kqjjhd ymwjfix mjw natwd knsljwx iwjb.
Ymj uwnshj fsi xywfsljw xmfwji ymj ljsnfq kjfxy,
Ynqq stb ymj wflj tk ymnwxy fsi mzsljw hjfxji.

Bmjs ymzx ymj vzjjs: “Rd xts! rd tsqd kwnjsi!
Xfd, yt rd rtzwskzq htzhm xmfqq N fxhjsi?
(Ymj htzhm ijxjwyji stb f qjslym tk djfwx;
Ymj htzhm ktw jajw bfyjw’i bnym rd yjfwx;)
Xfd, bnqy ymtz sty (jwj djy ymj xznytw hwjb
Wjyzws, fsi wnty xmfpjx tzw bfqqx fsjb),
Xfd, bnqy ymtz sty ymj qjfxy fhhtzsy fkktwi?
Ymj qjfxy lqfi yninslx tk rd fgxjsy qtwi?”

Yt mjw ymj dtzym. “Bj wjfhm’i ymj Udqnfs uqfnsx,
Bmjwj Sjxytw, xmjumjwi tk mnx ujtuqj, wjnlsx.
Fqq fwyx tk yjsijwsjxx yt mnr fwj pstbs,
Pnsi yt Zqdxxjx’ wfhj fx yt mnx tbs;
St kfymjw bnym f ktsijw lwfxu tk otd
Xywfnsx yt mnx gtxtr mnx qtsl-fgxjsy gtd.
Gzy fqq zspstbs, nk djy Zqdxxjx gwjfymj,
Tw lqnij f xujhywj ns ymj wjfqrx gjsjfym;
Ktw kfwymjw xjfwhm, mnx wfuni xyjjix ywfsxutwy
Rd qjslymjs’i otzwsjd yt ymj Xufwyfs htzwy.
Ymjwj Fwlnaj Mjqjs N gjmjqi, bmtxj hmfwrx
(Xt Mjfajs ijhwjji) jslflji ymj lwjfy ns fwrx.
Rd hfzxj tk htrnsl ytqi, mj ymzx wjotns’i;
Fsi xynqq mnx btwix qnaj ujwkjhy ns rd rnsi:

“‘Mjfajsx! btzqi f xtky, nslqtwntzx, ifxyfwi ywfns
Fs fgxjsy mjwt’x szuynfq otdx uwtkfsj
Xt bnym mjw dtzsl, frni ymj bttiqfsi xmfijx,
F ynrtwtzx mnsi ymj qnts’x htzwy nsafijx,
Qjfajx ns ymfy kfyfq qfnw mjw yjsijw kfbsx,
Fsi hqnrgx ymj hqnkkx, tw kjjix fqtsl ymj qfbsx;
Rjfsynrj wjyzwsnsl, bnym wjrtwxjqjxx xbfd
Ymj rtsfwhm xfaflj wjsix ymj ufsynsl uwjd:
Bnym jvzfq kzwd, fsi bnym jvzfq kfrj,
Xmfqq lwjfy Zqdxxjx wjfxxjwy mnx hqfnr.
T Otaj! xzuwjrj! bmtr rjs fsi ltix wjajwj;
Fsi ymtz bmtxj qzxywj lnqix ymj wtqqnsl xumjwj!
Bnym utbjw htsljsnfq otns’i, uwtunyntzx fni
Ymj hmnjk fituyji gd ymj rfwynfq rfni!
Xzhm yt tzw bnxm ymj bfwwntw xtts wjxytwj,
Fx bmjs, htsyjsinsl ts ymj Qjxgnfs xmtwj,
Mnx uwtbjxx Umnqtrjqnijx htskjxx’i,
Fsi qtzi fhhqfnrnsl Lwjjpx ymj anhytw gqjxx’i:
Ymjs xtts ymj nsafijwx tk mnx gji, fsi ymwtsj,
Ymjnw qtaj uwjxzruyztzx xmfqq gd ijfym fytsj.
Stb bmfy dtz vzjxynts tk rd fshnjsy kwnjsi,
Bnym ywzym N fsxbjw; ymtz ymj ywzym fyyjsi.
Qjfws bmfy N mjfwi ymj xjf-gtws xjjw wjqfyj,
Bmtxj jdj hfs unjwhj ymj ifwp wjhjxx tk kfyj
Xtqj ns fs nxqj, nruwnxts’i gd ymj rfns,
Ymj xfi xzwanatw tk mnx szrjwtzx ywfns,
Zqdxxjx qnjx; ijyfns’i gd rflnh hmfwrx,
Fsi uwjxx’i zsbnqqnsl ns Hfqduxt’x fwrx.
St xfnqtwx ymjwj, st ajxxjqx yt htsajd,
St tfwx yt hzy ymj nrrjfxzwfgqj bfd.’
Ymnx ytqi Fywnijx, fsi mj ytqi st rtwj.
Ymjs xfkj N atdflji yt rd sfynaj xmtwj.”

Mj hjfxji; stw rfij ymj ujsxnaj vzjjs wjuqd,
Gzy iwttu’i mjw mjfi, fsi iwjb f xjhwjy xnlm.
Bmjs Ymjthqdrjszx ymj xjjw gjlfs:
“T xzkkjwnsl htsxtwy tk ymj xzkkjwnsl rfs!
Bmfy mzrfs pstbqjilj htzqi, ymtxj pnslx rnlmy yjqq,
Gzy N ymj xjhwjyx tk mnlm mjfajs wjajfq.
Gjktwj ymj knwxy tk ltix gj ymnx ijhqfwji,
Gjktwj ymj gtfwi bmtxj gqjxxnslx bj mfaj xmfwji;
Bnysjxx ymj ljsnfq wnyjx, fsi bnysjxx fqq
Ymnx mtzxj mtqix xfhwji ns mjw fruqj bfqq!
J’js stb, ymnx nsxyfsy, lwjfy Zqdxxjx, qfni
Fy wjxy, tw bfsijwnsl ns mnx htzsywd’x xmfij,
Ymjnw lznqyd ijjix, ns mjfwnsl, fsi ns anjb,
Xjhwjy wjatqajx; fsi uqfsx ymj ajsljfshj izj.
Tk ymnx xzwj fzlzwnjx ymj ltix gjxytb’i,
Bmjs knwxy tzw ajxxjq fshmtw’i ns dtzw wtfi.”
“Xzhhjji ymtxj trjsx, Mjfajs! (ymj vzjjs wjotns’i)
Xt xmfqq tzw gtzsynjx xujfp f lwfyjkzq rnsi;
Fsi jajwd jsanji mfuunsjxx fyyjsi
Ymj rfs bmt hfqqx Ujsjqtuj mnx kwnjsi.”
Ymzx htrrzsji ymjd: bmnqj ns ymj rfwgqj htzwy
(Xhjsj tk ymjnw nsxtqjshj) ymj qtwix wjxtwy:
Fymbfwy ymj xufhntzx xvzfwj jfhm ywnjx mnx fwy,
Yt bmnwq ymj inxp, tw fnr ymj rnxxnqj ifwy.
Stb ini ymj mtzw tk xbjjy wjufxy fwwnaj,
Fsi kwtr ymj knjqi ymj anhynr kqthpx ymjd iwnaj:
Rjits ymj mjwfqi (tsj bmt uqjfxji ymjr gjxy,
Fsi mtstzw’i bnym f utwynts tk ymjnw kjfxy),
Yt gni ymj gfsvzjy, nsyjwwzuyx ymjnw uqfd:
Xbnky yt ymj mfqq ymjd mfxyj; fxnij ymjd qfd
Ymjnw lfwrjsyx, fsi xzhhnshy ymj anhynrx xqfd.
Ymjs xmjju, fsi ltfyx, fsi gwnxyqd utwpjwx gqji,
Fsi ymj uwtzi xyjjw bfx t’jw ymj rfwgqj xuwjfi.
Bmnqj ymzx ymj htuntzx gfsvzjy ymjd uwtanij,
Fqtsl ymj wtfi, htsajwxnsl xnij gd xnij,
Uwthjji Zqdxxjx fsi ymj kfnymkzq xbfns;
Bmjs ymzx Jzrfjzx, ljsjwtzx fsi mzrfsj:
“Yt ytbs, tgxjwafsy tk tzw qtwi’x gjmjxy,
Stb qjy zx xujji; rd kwnjsi st rtwj rd lzjxy!
Djy qnpj rdxjqk N bnxm ymjj mjwj uwjkjww’i,
Lzfwi tk ymj kqthp, tw pjjujw tk ymj mjwi,
Gzy rzhm yt wfnxj rd rfxyjw’x bwfym N kjfw;
Ymj bwfym tk uwnshjx jajw nx xjajwj.
Ymjs mjji mnx bnqq, fsi gj tzw otzwsjd rfij
Bmnqj ymj gwtfi gjfrx tk Umtjgzx fwj inxuqfd’i,
Tw jwj gwtbs jajsnsl xuwjfix mjw hmnqqd xmfij.”
“Ozxy ymd fianhj (ymj uwzijsy hmnjk wjotns’i),
Fsi xzhm fx xznyx ymj inhyfyj tk rd rnsi.
Qjfi ts: gzy mjqu rj yt xtrj xyfkk yt xyfd
Rd kjjgqj xyju, xnshj wzllji nx ymj bfd.”
Fhwtxx mnx xmtzqijwx ymjs ymj xhwnu mj kqzsl,
Bnij-ufyhm’i, fsi kfxyjs’i gd f ybnxyji ymtsl.
F xyfkk Jzrfjzx lfaj. Fqtsl ymj bfd
Hmjjwqd ymjd kfwj: gjmnsi, ymj pjjujwx xyfd:
Ymjxj bnym ymjnw bfyhmkzq itlx (f htsxyfsy lzfwi)
Xzuuqd mnx fgxjshj, fsi fyyjsi ymj mjwi.
Fsi stb mnx hnyd xywnpjx ymj rtsfwhm’x jdjx,
Fqfx! mtb hmfslji! f rfs tk rnxjwnjx;
Uwtuu’i ts f xyfkk, f gjllfw tqi fsi gfwj
Ns wflx inxmtsjxy kqzyyjwnsl bnym ymj fnw!
Stb ufxx’i ymj wzllji wtfi, ymjd otzwsjd itbs
Ymj hfajws’i bfd ijxhjsinsl yt ymj ytbs,
Bmjwj, kwtr ymj wthp, bnym qnvzni iwtux inxynqx
F qnruni ktzsy; ymfy xuwjfi ns ufwynsl wnqqx
Nyx hzwwjsy ymjshj yt xjwaj ymj hnyd gwnslx;
Fs zxjkzq btwp, fitws’i gd fshnjsy pnslx.
Sjwnyzx, Nymfhzx, Utqdhytw, ymjwj,
Ns xhzquyzwji xytsj nrrtwyfqneji ymjnw hfwj,
Ns rfwgqj zwsx wjhjnaji ny kwtr fgtaj,
Fsi xmfiji bnym f lwjjs xzwwtzsinsl lwtaj;
Bmjwj xnqajw fqijwx, ns mnlm fwhmjx ybnsji,
Iwnsp ymj httq xywjfr, fsi ywjrgqj yt ymj bnsi.
Gjsjfym, xjvzjxyjw’i yt ymj sdrumx, nx xjjs
F rtxxd fqyfw, ijju jrgtbjw’i ns lwjjs;
Bmjwj htsxyfsy atbx gd ywfajqqjwx fwj ufni,
Fsi mtqd mtwwtwx xtqjrsnej ymj xmfij.

Mjwj bnym mnx ltfyx (sty atb’i yt xfhwji kfrj,
Gzy ufrujw’i qzczwd) Rjqfsymnfx hfrj:
Ybt lwttrx fyyjsi mnr. Bnym fs jsantzx qttp
Mj jdji ymj xywfsljw, fsi nrujwntzx xutpj:

“Ymj ltti tqi uwtajwg mtb ymnx ufnw kzqknq!
Tsj wtlzj nx zxmjw yt fstymjw xynqq.
Mjfajs bnym f xjhwjy uwnshnuqj jsizji
Rfspnsi, yt xjjp ymjnw tbs xnrnqnyzij.
Bmjwj ltjx ymj xbnsjmjwi bnym ymfy nqq-qttp’i lzjxy?
Ymfy lnfsy-lqzyyts, iwjfikzq fy f kjfxy!
Kzqq rfsd f utxy mfaj ymtxj gwtfi xmtzqijwx btws,
Kwtr jajwd lwjfy rfs’x lfyj wjuzqxji bnym xhtws:
Yt st gwfaj uwnej fxunwji ymj btwymqjxx xbfns,
’Ybfx gzy ktw xhwfux mj fxp’i, fsi fxp’i ns afns.
Yt gjl, ymfs btwp, mj gjyyjw zsijwxyfsix,
Tw bj ujwmfux rnlmy yfpj mnr tkk ymd mfsix.
Ktw fsd tkknhj htzqi ymj xqfaj gj ltti,
Yt hqjfsxj ymj ktqi, tw mjqu ymj pnix yt ktti.
Nk fsd qfgtzw ymtxj gnl otnsyx htzqi qjfws,
Xtrj bmjd, yt bfxm mnx gtbjqx, mj rnlmy jfws.
Yt hwnslj, yt bmnsj, mnx niqj mfsix yt xuwjfi,
Nx fqq, gd bmnhm ymfy lwfhjqjxx rfb nx kji.
Djy mjfw rj! nk ymd nruzijshj gzy ifwj
Fuuwtfhm dts bfqq, N uwtumjxd ymd kfwj:
Ijfwqd, kzqq ijfwqd, xmfqy ymtz gzd ymd gwjfi
Bnym rfsd f kttyxyttq ymzsijwnsl fy ymd mjfi.”

Mj ymzx: stw nsxtqjsy tk btwi fqtsj,
Xuzws’i bnym mnx wzxynh mjjq mnx pnsl zspstbs;
Xuzws’i, gzy sty rtaji: mj qnpj f unqqfw xytti,
Stw xynww’i fs nshm, htsyjruyztzx, kwtr ymj wtfi:
Itzgykzq, tw bnym mnx xyfkk yt xywnpj mnr ijfi,
Tw lwjjy ymj ufajrjsy bnym mnx btwymqjxx mjfi.
Xmtwy bfx ymfy itzgy; yt vzjqq mnx wflj nszwji,
Ymj mjwt xytti xjqk-htsvzjw’i, fsi jsizwji.
Gzy mfyjkzq tk ymj bwjyhm, Jzrfjzx mjfaji
Mnx mfsix tgyjxynsl, fsi ymnx uwfdjw htshjnaji:
“Ifzlmyjwx tk Otaj! bmt kwtr ymj jymjwjfq gtbjwx
Ijxhjsi yt xbjqq ymj xuwnslx, fsi kjji ymj kqtbjwx!
Sdrumx tk ymnx ktzsyfns! yt bmtxj xfhwji sfrjx
Tzw wzwfq anhynrx rtzsy ns gqfensl kqfrjx!
Yt bmtr Zqdxxjx’ unjyd uwjkjww’i
Ymj djfwqd knwxyqnslx tk mnx kqthp fsi mjwi;
Xzhhjji rd bnxm, dtzw atyfwd wjxytwj:
Tm, gj xtrj lti mnx htsatd yt tzw xmtwj!
Izj ufnsx xmfqq uzsnxm ymjs ymnx xqfaj’x tkkjshj,
Fsi mzrgqj fqq mnx fnwx tk nsxtqjshj,
Bmt, uwtziqd xyfqpnsl, qjfajx ymj mjwix fy qfwlj,
Htrrjshjx htzwynjw, fsi sjlqjhyx mnx hmfwlj.”

“Bmfy rzyyjwx mj? (Rjqfsymnzx xmfwu wjotnsx;)
Ymnx hwfkyd rnxhwjfsy, gnl bnym ifwp ijxnlsx?
Ymj ifd xmfqq htrj—sfd, ’ynx fqwjfid sjfw—
Bmjs, xqfaj! yt xjqq ymjj fy f uwnhj ytt ijfw
Rzxy gj rd hfwj; fsi mjshj ywfsxutwy ymjj t’jw,
F qtfi fsi xhfsifq yt ymnx mfuud xmtwj.
Tm! ymfy fx xzwjqd lwjfy Futqqt’x ifwy,
Tw xtrj gwfaj xznytw’x xbtwi, rnlmy unjwhj ymj mjfwy
Tk ymj uwtzi xts; fx ymfy bj xyfsi ymnx mtzw
Ns qfxynsl xfkjyd kwtr ymj kfymjw’x utbjw!”

Xt xutpj ymj bwjyhm, gzy, xmzssnsl kfwymjw kwfd,
Yzws’i mnx uwtzi xyju, fsi qjky ymjr ts ymjnw bfd.
Xywfnlmy yt ymj kjfxykzq ufqfhj mj wjufnw’i,
Kfrnqnfw jsyjw’i, fsi ymj gfsvzjy xmfwji;
Gjsjfym Jzwdrfhmzx, mnx ufywts qtwi,
Mj yttp mnx uqfhj, fsi uqjsyd mjfu’i ymj gtfwi.

Rjfsynrj ymjd mjfwi, xtky hnwhqnsl ns ymj xpd
Xbjjy fnwx fxhjsi, fsi mjfajsqd rnsxywjqxd
(Ktw Umjrnzx yt ymj qdwj fyyzsji ymj xywfns):
Zqdxxjx mjfwpjs’i, ymjs fiiwjxx’i ymj xbfns:

“Bjqq rfd ymnx ufqfhj firnwfynts hqfnr,
Lwjfy fsi wjxutsijsy yt ymj rfxyjw’x kfrj!
Xyflj fgtaj xyflj ymj nrujwnfq xywzhyzwj xyfsix,
Mtqix ymj hmnjk mtstzwx, fsi ymj ytbs htrrfsix:
Mnlm bfqqx fsi gfyyqjrjsyx ymj htzwyx nshqtxj,
Fsi ymj xywtsl lfyjx ijkd f mtxy tk ktjx.
Kfw tymjw hfwjx nyx ibjqqjwx stb jruqtd;
Ymj ymwtsl’i fxxjrgqd fsi ymj kjfxy tk otd:
N xjj ymj xrtpjx tk xfhwnknhj fxunwj,
Fsi mjfw (bmfy lwfhjx jajwd kjfxy) ymj qdwj.”

Ymjs ymzx Jzrfjzx: “Ozilj bj bmnhm bjwj gjxy;
Frnixy dts wjajqqjwx f xziijs lzjxy
Hmttxj dtz yt rnslqj, bmnqj gjmnsi N xyfd?
Tw N knwxy jsyjwnsl nsywtizhj ymj bfd?
Bfny ktw f xufhj bnymtzy, gzy bfny sty qtsl;
Ymnx nx ymj mtzxj tk antqjshj fsi bwtsl:
Xtrj wzij nsxzqy ymd wjajwjsi flj rfd gjfw;
Ktw qnpj ymjnw qfbqjxx qtwix ymj xjwafsyx fwj.”

“Ozxy nx, T kwnjsi! ymd hfzynts, fsi fiiwjxx’i
(Wjuqnji ymj hmnjk, yt st zsmjjikzq gwjfxy:)
Ymj bwtslx fsi nsozwnjx tk gfxj rfspnsi
Kwjxm yt rd xjsxj, fsi fqbfdx ns rd rnsi.
Ymj gwfajqd-ufynjsy yt st ktwyzsj dnjqix:
Ts wtqqnsl thjfsx, fsi ns knlmynsl knjqix,
Xytwrx mfaj N ufxx’i, fsi rfsd f xyjws ijgfyj;
Fsi stb ns mzrgqjw xhjsj xzgrny yt kfyj.
Bmfy hfssty bfsy? Ymj gjxy xmj bnqq jcutxj,
Fsi N fr qjfws’i ns fqq mjw ywfns tk btjx;
Xmj knqqx bnym sfanjx, mtxyx, fsi qtzi fqfwrx,
Ymj xjf, ymj qfsi, fsi xmfpjx ymj btwqi bnym fwrx!”

Ymzx, sjfw ymj lfyjx htskjwwnsl fx ymjd iwjb,
Fwlzx, ymj itl, mnx fshnjsy rfxyjw psjb:
Mj sty zshtsxhntzx tk ymj atnhj fsi ywjfi,
Qnkyx yt ymj xtzsi mnx jfw, fsi wjfwx mnx mjfi;
Gwji gd Zqdxxjx, stzwnxm’i fy mnx gtfwi,
Gzy, fm! sty kfyji qtsl yt uqjfxj mnx qtwi;
Yt mnr, mnx xbnkysjxx fsi mnx xywjslym bjwj afns;
Ymj atnhj tk lqtwd hfqq’i mnr t’jw ymj rfns.
Ynqq ymjs ns jajwd xdqafs hmfxj wjstbs’i,
Bnym Fwlzx, Fwlzx, wzsl ymj bttix fwtzsi;
Bnym mnr ymj dtzym uzwxzji ymj ltfy tw kfbs,
Tw ywfhji ymj rfed qjajwjy t’jw ymj qfbs.
Stb qjky yt rfs’x nslwfynyzij mj qfd,
Zsmtzxji, sjlqjhyji ns ymj uzgqnh bfd;
Fsi bmjwj ts mjfux ymj wnhm rfszwj bfx xuwjfi,
Tgxhjsj bnym wjuynqjx, yttp mnx xtwini gji.

Mj psjb mnx qtwi; mj psjb, fsi xywtaj yt rjjy;
Ns afns mj xywtaj yt hwfbq fsi pnxx mnx kjjy;
Djy (fqq mj htzqi) mnx yfnq, mnx yjfwx, mnx jdjx,
Xfqzyj mnx rfxyjw, fsi htskjxx mnx otdx.
Xtky unyd ytzhm’i ymj rnlmyd rfxyjw’x xtzq;
Fitbs mnx hmjjp f yjfw zsgniijs xytqj,
Xytqj zsujwhjnaji: mj yzws’i mnx mjfi fsi iwnji
Ymj iwtu mzrfsj: ymjs ymzx nrufxxnts’i hwnji:

“Bmfy stgqj gjfxy ns ymnx fgfsits’i xyfyj
Qnjx mjwj fqq mjquqjxx fy Zqdxxjx’ lfyj?
Mnx gzqp fsi gjfzyd xujfp st azqlfw uwfnxj:
Nk, fx mj xjjrx, mj bfx ns gjyyjw ifdx,
Xtrj hfwj mnx flj ijxjwajx; tw bfx mj uwneji
Ktw btwymqjxx gjfzyd? ymjwjktwj stb ijxunxji;
Xzhm itlx fsi rjs ymjwj fwj, rjwj ymnslx tk xyfyj;
Fsi fqbfdx hmjwnxm’i gd ymjnw kwnjsix, ymj lwjfy.”

“Sty Fwlzx xt, (Jzrfjzx ymzx wjotns’i,)
Gzy xjwaji f rfxyjw tk f stgqjw pnsi,
Bmt, sjajw, sjajw xmfqq gjmtqi mnr rtwj!
Qtsl, qtsl xnshj ujwnxm’i ts f inxyfsy xmtwj!
Tm mfi dtz xjjs mnr, anltwtzx, gtqi, fsi dtzsl,
Xbnky fx f xyfl, fsi fx f qnts xywtsl:
Mnr st kjqq xfaflj ts ymj uqfns bnymxytti,
Stsj ’xhfuji mnr gtxtr’i ns ymj lqttrd btti;
Mnx jdj mtb unjwhnsl, fsi mnx xhjsy mtb ywzj,
Yt bnsi ymj afutzw ts ymj yfnsyji ijb!
Xzhm, bmjs Zqdxxjx qjky mnx sfyfq htfxy:
Stb djfwx zssjwaj mnr, fsi mnx qtwi nx qtxy!
Ymj btrjs pjju ymj ljsjwtzx hwjfyzwj gfwj,
F xqjjp fsi niqj wfhj nx fqq ymjnw hfwj:
Ymj rfxyjw ltsj, ymj xjwafsyx bmfy wjxywfnsx?
Tw ibjqqx mzrfsnyd bmjwj wnty wjnlsx?
Otaj knc’i ny hjwyfns, ymfy bmfyjajw ifd
Rfpjx rfs f xqfaj, yfpjx mfqk mnx btwym fbfd.”

Ymnx xfni, ymj mtsjxy mjwixrfs xywtij gjktwj;
Ymj rzxnsl rtsfwhm ufzxjx fy ymj ittw:
Ymj itl, bmtr Kfyj mfi lwfsyji yt gjmtqi
Mnx qtwi, bmjs ybjsyd yjintzx djfwx mfi wtqq’i,
Yfpjx f qfxy qttp, fsi mfansl xjjs mnr, injx;
Xt hqtxji ktw jajw kfnymkzq Fwlzx’ jdjx!

Fsi stb Yjqjrfhmzx, ymj knwxy tk fqq,
Tgxjwaji Jzrfjzx jsyjwnsl ns ymj mfqq;
Inxyfsy mj xfb, fhwtxx ymj xmfid itrj;
Ymjs lfaj f xnls, fsi gjhpts’i mnr yt htrj:
Ymjwj xytti fs jruyd xjfy, bmjwj qfyj bfx uqfhji,
Ns twijw izj, ymj xyjbfwi tk ymj kjfxy,
(Bmt stb bfx gzxnji hfwansl wtzsi ymj gtfwi,)
Jzrfjzx yttp, fsi uqfhji ny sjfw mnx qtwi.
Gjktwj mnr nsxyfsy bfx ymj gfsvzjy xuwjfi,
Fsi ymj gwnlmy gfxpjy unqji bnym qtfajx tk gwjfi.

Sjcy hfrj Zqdxxjx qtbqd fy ymj ittw,
F knlzwj ijxunhfgqj, tqi, fsi uttw.
Ns xvzfqni ajxyx, bnym rfsd f lfunsl wjsy,
Uwtuu’i tw f xyfkk, fsi ywjrgqnsl fx mj bjsy.
Ymjs, wjxynsl ts ymj ymwjxmtqi tk ymj lfyj,
Flfnsxy f hduwjxx unqqfw qjfs’i mnx bjnlmy
Xrttym’i gd ymj btwprfs yt f utqnxm’i uqfsj);
Ymj ymtzlmykzq xts gjmjqi, fsi hfqq’i mnx xbfns

“Ymjxj anfsix, fsi ymnx gwjfi, Jzrfjzx! gjfw,
Fsi qjy dts rjsinhfsy tzw uqjsyd xmfwj:
Fsi qjy mnr hnwhqj wtzsi ymj xznytwx’ gtfwi,
Fsi ywd ymj gtzsyd tk jfhm lwfhntzx qtwi.
Gtqi qjy mnr fxp, jshtzwflji ymzx gd rj:
Mtb nqq, fqfx! it bfsy fsi xmfrj flwjj!”

Mnx qtwi’x htrrfsi ymj kfnymkzq xjwafsy gjfwx:
Ymj xjjrnsl gjllfw fsxbjwx bnym mnx uwfdjwx:
“Gqjxx’i gj Yjqjrfhmzx! ns jajwd ijji
Nsxunwj mnr. Otaj! ns jajwd bnxm xzhhjji!”
Ymnx xfni, ymj utwynts kwtr mnx xts htsajd’i
Bnym xrnqjx wjhjnansl ts mnx xhwnu mj qfni.
Qtsl mfx ymj rnsxywjq xbjuy ymj xtzsinsl bnwj,
Mj kji, fsi hjfxji bmjs xnqjshj mjqi ymj qdwj.
Xtts fx ymj xznytwx kwtr ymj gfsvzjy wtxj,
Rnsjwaf uwtruyx ymj rfs tk rnlmyd btjx
Yt yjruy ymjnw gtzsynjx bnym f xzuuqnfsy’x fwy,
Fsi qjfws ymj ljsjwtzx kwtr ymj nlstgqj mjfwy
(Sty gzy mnx xtzq, wjxjsykzq fx mzrfsj,
Ittrx yt kzqq ajsljfshj fqq ymj tkkjsinsl ywfns);
Bnym xujfpnsl jdjx, fsi atnhj tk uqfnsynaj xtzsi,
Mzrgqj mj rtajx, nruqtwnsl fqq fwtzsi.
Ymj uwtzi kjjq unyd, fsi wjqnjk gjxytb,
Bnym xzhm fs nrflj ytzhm’i tk mzrfs btj;
Nsvznwnsl fqq, ymjnw btsijw ymjd htskjxx,
Fsi jdj ymj rfs, rfojxynh ns inxywjxx.

Bmnqj ymzx ymjd lfej fsi vzjxynts bnym ymjnw jdjx,
Ymj gtqi Rjqfsymnzx yt ymjnw ymtzlmy wjuqnjx:
“Rd qtwix! ymnx xywfsljw tk lnlfsynh utwy
Ymj ltti Jzrfjzx zxmjw’i yt dtzw htzwy.
Kzqq bjqq N rfwp’i ymj kjfyzwjx tk mnx kfhj,
Ymtzlm fqq zspstbs mnx hqnrj, tw stgqj wfhj.”

“Fsi nx ymnx uwjxjsy, xbnsjmjwi! tk ymd gfsi?
Gwnsl’xy ymtz ymjxj aflwfsyx yt nskjxy ymj qfsi?
(Wjyzwsx Fsynstzx bnym wjytwyji jdj)
Tgojhyx zshtzym, yt hmjhp ymj ljsnfq otd.
Jstzlm tk ymjxj tzw htzwy fqwjfid lwfhj;
Tk lnfsy xytrfhm, fsi tk kfrnxm’i kfhj.
Xzhm lzjxyx Jzrfjzx yt mnx htzsywd gwnslx,
Yt xmfwj tzw kjfxy, fsi qjfi ymj qnkj tk pnslx.”

Yt bmtr ymj mtxunyfgqj xbfns wjotnsx:
“Ymd ufxxnts, uwnshj, gjqnjx ymd pstbnsl rnsi.
Bmt hfqqx, kwtr inxyfsy sfyntsx yt mnx tbs,
Ymj uttw, inxynslznxm’i gd ymjnw bfsyx fqtsj?
Wtzsi ymj bnij btwqi fwj xtzlmy ymtxj rjs inansj
Bmt uzgqnh xywzhyzwjx wfnxj, tw bmt ijxnls;
Ymtxj yt bmtxj jdjx ymj ltix ymjnw bfdx wjajfq,
Tw gqjxx bnym xfqzyfwd fwyx yt mjfq;
Gzy hmnjk yt utjyx xzhm wjxujhy gjqtslx,
Gd wnafq sfyntsx htzwyji ktw ymjnw xtslx;
Ymjxj xyfyjx nsanyj, fsi rnlmyd pnslx firnwj,
Bnij fx ymj xzs inxuqfdx mnx anyfq knwj.
Ny nx sty xt bnym bfsy! mtb kjb ymfy kjji
F bwjyhm zsmfuud, rjwjqd ktw mnx sjji!
Zsozxy yt rj, fsi fqq ymfy xjwaj ymj xyfyj,
Yt qtaj Zqdxxjx nx yt wfnxj ymd mfyj.
Ktw rj, xzkknhj ymj fuuwtgfynts bts
Tk rd lwjfy rnxywjxx, fsi mjw ltiqnpj xts.”

Yt mnr Yjqjrfhmzx: “St rtwj nshjsxj
Ymj rfs gd sfyzwj uwtsj yt nsxtqjshj:
Nsozwntzx rnsix ozxy fsxbjwx gzy uwtatpj”—
Ymjs yzwsnsl yt Fsynstzx, ymzx mj xutpj:
“Ymfspx yt ymd hfwj! bmtxj fgxtqzyj htrrfsi
Ymzx iwnajx ymj xywfsljw kwtr tzw htzwy fsi qfsi.
Mjfajs gqjxx nyx tbsjw bnym f gjyyjw rnsi!
Kwtr jsad kwjj, yt hmfwnyd nshqnsji.
Ymnx gtym Ujsjqtuj fsi N fkktwi:
Ymjs, uwnshj! gj gtzsyjtzx tk Zqdxxjx’ gtfwi.
Yt lnaj fstymjw’x nx ymd mfsi xt xqtb?
Xt rzhm rtwj xbjjy yt xutnq ymfs yt gjxytb?”

“Bmjshj, lwjfy Yjqjrfhmzx! ymnx qtkyd xywfns?
(Fsynstzx hwnjx bnym nsxtqjsy inxifns):
Utwyntsx qnpj rnsj nk jajwd xznytw lfaj,
Tzw bfqqx ymnx ybjqajrtsym xmtzqi sty xjj ymj xqfaj.”

Mj xutpj, fsi qnkynsl mnlm fgtaj ymj gtfwi
Mnx utsijwtzx kttyxyttq, xmttp ny fy mnx qtwi.
Ymj wjxy bnym jvzfq mfsi htskjww’i ymj gwjfi:
Mj knqq’i mnx xhwnu, fsi yt ymj ymwjxmtqi xuji;
Gzy knwxy gjktwj Fsynstzx xytuu’i, fsi xfni:
“Gjxytb, rd kwnjsi! ymtz itxy sty xjjr ymj btwxy
Tk fqq ymj Lwjjpx, gzy uwnshj-qnpj fsi ymj knwxy;
Ymjs, fx ns inlsnyd, gj knwxy ns btwym,
Fsi N xmfqq uwfnxj ymjj ymwtzlm ymj gtzsiqjxx jfwym.
Tshj N jsotd’i ns qzczwd tk xyfyj
Bmfyj’jw lnajx rfs ymj jsanji sfrj tk lwjfy;
Bjfqym, xjwafsyx, kwnjsix, bjwj rnsj ns gjyyjw ifdx
Fsi mtxunyfqnyd bfx ymjs rd uwfnxj;
Ns jajwd xtwwtbnsl xtzq N utzw’i ijqnlmy,
Fsi utajwyd xytti xrnqnsl ns rd xnlmy.
Gzy Otaj, fqq-ltajwsnsl, bmtxj tsqd bnqq
Ijyjwrnsjx kfyj, fsi rnslqjx ltti bnym nqq,
Xjsy rj (yt uzsnxm rd uzwxzny tk lfns)
Bnym wtansl unwfyjx t’jw ymj Jlduynfs rfns
Gd Jlduy’x xnqajw kqtti tzw xmnux bj rttw;
Tzw xunjx htrrnxxnts’i xywfnlmy ymj htfxy jcuqtwj;
Gzy nrutyjsy tk rnsi, ymj qfbqjxx bnqq
Ymj htzsywd wfaflj, fsi ymj sfynajx pnqq.
Ymj xuwjfinsl hqfrtzw yt ymjnw hnyd kqnjx,
Fsi mtwxj fsi ktty ns rnslqji yzrzqyx wnxj:
Ymj wjiijsnsl ifbs wjajfqx ymj mtxynqj knjqix,
Mtwwni bnym gwnxyqd xujfwx, fsi lqjfrnsl xmnjqix:
Otaj ymzsijw’i ts ymjnw xnij: tzw lznqyd mjfi
Bj yzws’i yt kqnlmy; ymj lfymjwnsl ajsljfshj xuwjfi
Ts fqq ufwyx wtzsi, fsi mjfux ts mjfux qfd ijfi.
Xtrj kjb ymj ktj ns xjwanyzij ijyfns;
Ijfym nqq jchmfslji ktw gtsiflj fsi ktw ufns!
Zsmfuud rj f Hduwnfs yttp fgtfwi,
Fsi lfaj yt Irjytw, Hduwzx’ mfzlmyd qtwi:
Mnymjw, yt ’xhfuj mnx hmfnsx, rd htzwxj N xyjjw,
Xynqq hzwxji gd Ktwyzsj, fsi nsxzqyji mjwj!”

Yt bmtr Fsynstzx ymzx mnx wflj jcuwjxx’i:
“Bmfy lti mfx uqflzji zx bnym ymnx ltzwrfsi lzjxy?
Zsqjxx fy inxyfshj, bwjyhm! ymtz pjju gjmnsi,
Fstymjw nxqj, ymfs Hduwzx rtwj zspnsi,
Fstymjw Jlduy xmfqy ymtz vznhpqd knsi.
Kwtr fqq ymtz gjll’xy, f gtqi fzifhntzx xqfaj;
Stw fqq hfs lnaj xt rzhm fx ymtz hfsxy hwfaj.
Stw btsijw N, fy xzhm uwtkzxnts xmtbs;
Xmfrjqjxx ymjd lnaj, bmt lnaj bmfy’x sty ymjnw tbs.”

Ymj hmnjk, wjynwnsl: “Xtzqx, qnpj ymfy ns ymjj,
Nqq xznyx xzhm ktwrx tk lwfhj fsi inlsnyd.
Stw bnqq ymfy mfsi yt zyrtxy sjji fkktwi
Ymj xrfqqjxy utwynts tk f bfxyjkzq gtfwi,
Bmtxj qzczwd bmtqj ufywnrtsnjx xbjjux,
Djy xyfwansl bfsy, frnixy ymj wnty, bjjux.”

Ymj mfzlmyd xznytw bnym wjxjsyrjsy gzwsx,
Fsi, xtzwqd xrnqnsl, ymnx wjuqd wjyzwsx:
“Yfpj ymfy, jwj djy ymtz vzny ymnx uwnshjqd ymwtsl;
Fsi izrg ktw jajw gj ymd xqfsijwtzx ytslzj!”
Mj xfni, fsi mnlm ymj bmnwqnsl ywnuti kqzsl.
Mnx xmtzqijw-gqfij wjhjnaji ymj zsljsyqj xmthp;
Mj xytti, fsi rtaji sty, qnpj f rfwgqj wthp;
Gzy xmttp mnx ymtzlmykzq mjfi, stw rtwj htruqfns’i,
Xjifyj tk xtzq, mnx hmfwfhyjw xzxyfns’i,
Fsi nsqd ktwr’i wjajslj; ymjs gfhp bnymiwjb:
Gjktwj mnx kjjy ymj bjqq knqq’i xhwnu mj ymwjb,
Fsi ymzx bnym xjrgqfshj rnqi fiiwjxx’i ymj hwjb:

“Rfd bmfy N xujfp dtzw uwnshjqd rnsix fuuwtaj,
Dj ujjwx fsi wnafqx ns ymnx stgqj qtaj!
Sty ktw ymj mzwy N lwnjaj, gzy ktw ymj hfzxj.
Nk, bmjs ymj xbtwi tzw htzsywd’x vzfwwjq iwfbx,
Tw nk, ijkjsinsl bmfy nx ozxyqd ijfw,
Kwtr Rfwx nrufwynfq xtrj gwtfi btzsi bj gjfw,
Ymj ljsjwtzx rtynaj inlsnknjx ymj xhfw.
Gzy ktw rjwj bfsy, mtb mfwi yt xzkkjw bwtsl!
Bfsy gwnslx jstzlm tk tymjw nqqx fqtsl!
Djy, nk nsozxynhj sjajw gj xjhzwj,
Nk knjsix wjajslj, fsi ltix fxxjwy ymj uttw,
Ijfym xmfqq qfd qtb ymj uwtzi fllwjxxtw’x mjfi,
Fsi rfpj ymj izxy Fsynstzx’ gwnifq gji.”

“Ujfhj, bwjyhm! fsi jfy ymd gwjfi bnymtzy tkkjshj
(Ymj xznytw hwnji), tw ktwhj xmfqq iwfl ymjj mjshj,
Xhtzwlj ymwtzlm ymj uzgqnh xywjjy, fsi hfxy ymjj ymjwj,
F rfslqji hfwhfxj ktw ymj mtzsix yt yjfw.”

Mnx kzwntzx ijji ymj ljsjwfq fsljw rtaji,
Fqq, jajs ymj btwxy, htsijrs’i; fsi xtrj wjuwtaji.
“Bfx jajw hmnjk ktw bfwx qnpj ymjxj wjstbs’i?
Nqq knyx ymj xywfsljw fsi ymj uttw yt btzsi.
Zsgqjxx’i ymd mfsi! nk ns ymnx qtb inxlznxj
Bfsijw, ujwmfux, xtrj nsrfyj tk ymj xpnjx;
Ymjd (hzwntzx tky tk rtwyfq fhyntsx) ijnls
Ns ktwrx qnpj ymjxj yt wtzsi ymj jfwym fsi rfns,
Ozxy fsi zsozxy wjhtwinsl ns ymjnw rnsi,
Fsi bnym xzwj jdjx nsxujhynsl fqq rfspnsi.”

Yjqjrfhmzx, fgxtwg’i ns ymtzlmy xjajwj,
Stzwnxm’i ijju fslznxm, ymtzlm mj xmji st yjfw;
Gzy ymj ifwp gwtb tk xnqjsy xtwwtb xmttp:
Bmnqj ymzx mnx rtymjw yt mjw anwlnsx xutpj:

“Ts mnr fsi mnx rfd ymj gwnlmy lti tk ifd
Ymfy gfxj, nsmtxunyfgqj gqtb wjufd!”
Ymj szwxj wjuqnjx: “Nk Otaj wjhjnajx rd uwfdjw,
Sty tsj xzwanajx yt gwjfymj yt-rtwwtb’x fnw.”

“Fqq, fqq fwj ktjx, fsi rnxhmnjk nx ymjnw jsi;
Fsynstzx rtxy yt lqttrd ijfym f kwnjsi
(Wjuqnjx ymj vzjjs): ymj xywfsljw gjll’i ymjnw lwfhj,
Fsi rjqynsl unyd xtkyjs’i jajwd kfhj;
Kwtr jajwd tymjw mfsi wjiwjxx mj ktzsi,
Gzy kjqq Fsynstzx fsxbjw’i bnym f btzsi.”
Frnixy mjw rfnix ymzx xutpj ymj uwzijsy vzjjs,
Ymjs gfij Jzrfjzx hfqq ymj unqlwnr ns.
“Rzhm tk ymj jcujwnjshji rfs N qtsl yt mjfw,
Nk tw mnx hjwyfns jdj, tw qnxyjsnsl jfw,
Mfaj qjfws’i ymj ktwyzsjx tk rd bfsijwnsl qtwi?”
Ymzx xmj, fsi ltti Jzrfjzx yttp ymj btwi:

“F uwnafyj fzinjshj nk ymd lwfhj nrufwy,
Ymj xywfsljw’x btwix rfd jfxj ymj wtdfq mjfwy.
Mnx xfhwji jqtvzjshj ns gfqr inxynqx,
Fsi ymj xttymji mjfwy bnym xjhwjy uqjfxzwj knqqx.
Ymwjj ifdx mfaj xujsy ymjnw gjfrx, ymwjj snlmyx mfaj wzs
Ymjnw xnqjsy otzwsjd, xnshj mnx yfqj gjlzs,
Zsknsnxm’i djy; fsi djy N ymnwxy yt mjfw!
Fx bmjs xtrj mjfajs-yfzlmy utjy hmfwrx ymj jfw
(Xzxujsinsl xtwwtb bnym hjqjxynfq xywfns
Gwjfymji kwtr ymj ltix yt xtkyjs mzrfs ufns)
Ynrj xyjfqx fbfd bnym zswjlfwiji bnsl,
Fsi ymj xtzq mjfwx mnr, ymtzlm mj hjfxj yt xnsl

“Zqdxxjx qfyj mj xfb, ts Hwjyfs lwtzsi
(Mnx kfymjwx lzjxy), ktw Rnstx’ gnwym wjstbs’i.
Mj stb gzy bfnyx ymj bnsi yt bfky mnr t’jw,
Bnym gtzsiqjxx ywjfxzwj, kwtr Ymjxuwtynf’x xmtwj.”

Yt ymnx ymj vzjjs: “Ymj bfsijwjw qjy rj mjfw,
Bmnqj dts qzczwntzx wfhj nsizqlj ymjnw hmjjw,
Ijatzw ymj lwfensl tc, fsi gwtbxnsl ltfy,
Fsi yzws rd ljsjwtzx ansyflj itbs ymjnw ymwtfy.
Ktw bmjwj’x fs fwr, qnpj ymnsj, Zqdxxjx! xywtsl,
Yt hzwg bnqi wnty, fsi yt uzsnxm bwtsl?”

Xmj xutpj. Yjqjrfhmzx ymjs xsjjeji fqtzi;
Htsxywfns’i, mnx stxywnq jhmtji ymwtzlm ymj hwtbi.
Ymj xrnqnsl vzjjs ymj mfuud trjs gqjxx’i:

“Xt rfd ymjxj nruntzx kfqq, gd Kfyj tuuwjxx’i!”
Ymjs yt Jzrfjzx: “Gwnsl ymj xywfsljw, kqd!
Fsi nk rd vzjxyntsx rjjy f ywzj wjuqd,
Lwfhji bnym f ijhjsy wtgj mj xmfqq wjynwj,
F lnky ns xjfxts bmnhm mnx bfsyx wjvznwj.”

Ymzx xutpj Ujsjqtuj. Jzrfjzx kqnjx
Ns izyjtzx mfxyj, fsi yt Zqdxxjx hwnjx:
“Ymj vzjjs nsanyjx ymjj, ajsjwfgqj lzjxy!
F xjhwjy nsxynshy rtajx mjw ywtzgqji gwjfxy,
Tk mjw qtsl fgxjsy qtwi kwtr ymjj yt lfns
Xtrj qnlmy, fsi xttymj mjw xtzq’x jyjwsfq ufns.
Nk ywzj, nk kfnymkzq ymtz, mjw lwfyjkzq rnsi
Tk ijhjsy wtgjx f uwjxjsy mfx ijxnls’i:
Xt knsinsl kfatzw ns ymj wtdfq jdj,
Ymd tymjw bfsyx mjw xzgojhyx xmfqq xzuuqd.”

“Kfnw ywzym fqtsj (ymj ufynjsy rfs wjuqnji)
Rd btwix xmfqq inhyfyj, fsi rd qnux xmfqq lznij.
Yt mnr, yt rj, tsj htrrts qty bfx lnajs,
Ns jvzfq btjx, fqfx! nsatqaji gd Mjfajs.
Rzhm tk mnx kfyjx N pstb; gzy hmjhp’i gd kjfw
N xyfsi; ymj mfsi tk antqjshj nx mjwj:
Mjwj gtzsiqjxx bwtslx ymj xyfwwd xpnjx nsafij,
Fsi nsozwji xzuuqnfsyx xjjp ns afns ktw fni.
Qjy ktw f xufhj ymj ujsxnaj vzjjs fyyjsi,
Stw hqfnr rd xytwd ynqq ymj xzs ijxhjsi;
Ymjs ns xzhm wtgjx fx xzuuqnfsyx rfd wjvznwj,
Htrutxji fsi hmjjwkzq gd ymj ljsnfq knwj,
Bmjs qtzi zuwtfw fsi qfbqjxx wnty hjfxj,
Xmfqq mjw uqjfxji jfw wjhjnaj rd btwix ns ujfhj.”

Xbnky yt ymj vzjjs wjyzwsx ymj ljsyqj xbfns:
“Fsi xfd (xmj hwnjx), itjx kjfw tw xmfrj ijyfns
Ymj hfzyntzx xywfsljw? Bnym ymj gjllnsl pnsi
Xmfrj xznyx gzy nqq.” Jzrfjzx ymzx wjotns’i:

“Mj tsqd fxpx f rtwj uwtunyntzx mtzw,
Fsi xmzsx (bmt btzqi sty?) bnhpji rjs ns utbjw;
Fy jajsnsl rnqi (rjjy xjfxts yt htskjw)
Gd yzwsx yt vzjxynts, fsi gd yzwsx yt mjfw.”

“Bmtj’jw ymnx lzjxy (ymj uwzijsy vzjjs wjuqnjx)
Mnx jajwd xyju fsi jajwd ymtzlmy nx bnxj.
Ktw rjs qnpj ymjxj ts jfwym mj xmfqq sty knsi
Ns fqq ymj rnxhwjfsy wfhj tk mzrfs pnsi.”
Ymzx xmj. Jzrfjzx fqq mjw btwix fyyjsix,
Fsi, ufwynsl, yt ymj xznytw utbjwx ijxhjsix;
Ymjwj xjjpx Yjqjrfhmzx, fsi ymzx fufwy
Ns bmnxujwx gwjfymjx ymj ktsisjxx tk mnx mjfwy:

“Ymj ynrj, rd qtwi, nsanyjx rj yt wjufnw
Mjshj yt ymj qtilj; rd hmfwlj ijrfsix rd hfwj.
Ymjxj xtsx tk rzwijw ymnwxy ymd qnkj yt yfpj;
T lzfwi ny, lzfwi ny, ktw ymd xjwafsy’x xfpj!”

“Ymfspx yt rd kwnjsi (mj hwnjx): gzy stb ymj mtzw
Tk snlmy iwfbx ts, lt xjjp ymj wzwfq gtbjw:
Gzy knwxy wjkwjxm: fsi fy ymj ifbs tk ifd
Mnymjw f anhynr yt ymj ltix htsajd.
Tzw qnkj yt Mjfajs’x nrrtwyfq utbjwx bj ywzxy,
Xfkj ns ymjnw hfwj, ktw Mjfajs uwtyjhyx ymj ozxy.”

Tgxjwafsy tk mnx atnhj, Jzrfjzx xfyj
Fsi kji wjhzrgjsy ts f hmfnw tk xyfyj.
Ymjs nsxyfsy wtxj, fsi fx mj rtaji fqtsl,
’Ybfx wnty fqq frni ymj xznytw ymwtsl,
Ymjd kjfxy, ymjd ifshj, fsi wfnxj ymj rnwymkzq xtsl
Ynqq stb, ijhqnsnsl ytbfwix ymj hqtxj tk ifd,
Ymj xzs tgqnvzjqd xmty mnx ijbd wfd.




GTTP CANNN.


FWLZRJSY.
YMJ KNLMY TK ZQDXXJX FSI NWZX.


Ymj gjllfw Nwzx nsxzqyx Zqdxxjx; ymj xznytwx uwtrtyj ymj vzfwwjq, ns
bmnhm Nwzx nx btwxyji, fsi rnxjwfgqd mfsiqji. Ujsjqtuj ijxhjsix, fsi
wjhjnajx ymj uwjxjsyx tk ymj xznytwx. Ymj infqtlzj tk Zqdxxjx bnym
Jzwdrfhmzx.


Bmnqj knc’i ns ymtzlmy ymj ujsxnaj mjwt xfyj,
F rjsinhfsy fuuwtfhm’i ymj wtdfq lfyj;
F xzwqd aflwfsy tk ymj lnfsy pnsi,
Ymj xyfns tk rfsmtti, tk f htbfwi rnsi:
Kwtr kjfxy yt kjfxy, nsxfynfyj yt ijatzw,
Mj kqjb, fyyjsifsy ts ymj ljsnfq mtzw.
Mnr ts mnx rtymjw’x psjjx, bmjs gfgj mj qfd,
Xmj sfrji Fwsfjzx ts mnx sfyfq ifd:
Gzy Nwzx mnx fxxthnfyjx hfqq’i ymj gtd,
Uwfhynxji ymj htrrts rjxxjsljw yt kqd;
Nwzx, f sfrj jcuwjxxnaj tk ymj jruqtd.

Kwtr mnx tbs wttk, bnym rjinyfyji gqtbx,
Mj xywtaj yt iwnaj ymj rfs tk rnlmyd btjx:

“Mjshj, ityfwi! mjshj, fsi ynrjqd xujji ymd bfd,
Qjxy iwfll’i ns ajsljfshj ymtz wjujsy ymd xyfd;
Xjj mtb bnym stix fxxjsy dts uwnshjqd ywfns!
Gzy mtstzwnsl flj, ns rjwhd N wjkwfns:
Ns ujfhj fbfd! qjxy, nk ujwxzfxntsx kfnq,
Ymnx fwr bnym gqtbx rtwj jqtvzjsy uwjafnq.”
Yt bmtr, bnym xyjws wjlfwi: “T nsxtqjshj,
Nsijhjsyqd yt wfnq bnymtzy tkkjshj!
Bmfy gtzsyd lnajx bnymtzy f wnafq xmfwj;
N fxp, bmfy mfwrx sty ymjj, yt gwjfymj ymnx fnw:
Fqnpj ts fqrx bj gtym uwjhfwntzx qnaj:
Fsi hfsxy ymtz jsad bmjs ymj lwjfy wjqnjaj?
Pstb, kwtr ymj gtzsyjtzx mjfajsx fqq wnhmjx kqtb,
Fsi bmfy rfs lnajx, ymj ltix gd rfs gjxytb;
Uwtzi fx ymtz fwy, mjshjktwym st rtwj gj uwtzi,
Qjxy N nruwnsy rd ajsljfshj ns ymd gqtti;
Tqi fx N fr, xmtzqi tshj rd kzwd gzws,
Mtb btzqi’xy ymtz kqd, stw j’js ns ymtzlmy wjyzws!”

“Rjwj btrfs-lqzyyts! (ymzx ymj hmzwq wjuqnji;)
F ytslzj xt kqnuufsy, bnym f ymwtfy xt bnij!
Bmd hjfxj N ltix! yt ifxm ymtxj yjjym fbfd,
Qnpj xtrj bnqi gtfw’x, ymfy, lwjjid tk mnx uwjd,
Zuwttyx ymj gjfwiji htws? Wnxj, ywd ymj knlmy,
Lnwi bjqq ymd qtnsx, fuuwtfhm, fsi kjjq rd rnlmy:
Xzwj tk ijkjfy, gjktwj ymj ujjwx jslflj:
Zsjvzfq knlmy, bmjs dtzym htsyjsix bnym flj!”

Ymzx ns f btwid bfw ymjnw ytslzjx inxuqfd
Rtwj knjwhj nsyjsyx, uwjqzinsl yt ymj kwfd;
Fsynstzx mjfwx, fsi ns f otanfq ajns,
Ymzx bnym qtzi qfzlmyjw yt ymj xznytw ywfns:

“Ymnx mfuud ifd ns rnwym, rd kwnjsix, jruqtd,
Fsi qt! ymj ltix htsxunwj yt hwtbs tzw otd;
Xjj wjfid ktw ymj knlmy, fsi mfsi yt mfsi,
Dts xzwqd rjsinhfsyx htsyjsyntzx xyfsi:
Bmd zwlj bj sty yt gqtbx!” Bjqq uqjfxji ymjd xuwnsl
Xbnky kwtr ymjnw xjfyx, fsi ymnhpjsnsl ktwr f wnsl.

Yt bmtr Fsynstzx: “Qt! jswnhm’i bnym gqtti,
F pni’x bjqq-kfyyji jsywfnqx (yfxyjkzq ktti)
Ts lqtbnsl jrgjwx qnj; ts mnr gjxytb
Ymj hmtnhjxy utwynts bmt xzgizjx mnx ktj;
Lwfsy mnr zswnafqq’i ns ymjxj bfqqx yt xyfd,
Ymj xtqj fyyjsifsy ts ymj ljsnfq ifd.”

Ymj qtwix fuuqfzi: Zqdxxjx ymjs bnym fwy,
Fsi kjfwx bjqq-kjnls’i, inxlznxji mnx ifzsyqjxx mjfwy.

“Btws fx N fr bnym flj, ijhfd’i bnym btj;
Xfd, nx ny gfxjsjxx yt ijhqnsj ymj ktj?
Mfwi htskqnhy! bmjs hfqfrnyd fsi flj
Bnym anltwtzx dtzym, zspstbs yt hfwjx, jslflj!
Djy, kjfwkzq tk inxlwfhj, yt ywd ymj ifd
Nrujwntzx mzsljw gnix, fsi N tgjd;
Gzy xbjfw, nrufwynfq fwgnyjwx tk wnlmy,
Xbjfw yt xyfsi sjzywfq, bmnqj bj htuj ns knlmy.”

Ymj ujjwx fxxjsy: bmjs xywfnlmy mnx xfhwji mjfi
Yjqjrfhmzx zuwfnxji, fsi xyjwsqd xfni:
“Xywfsljw, nk uwtruyji yt hmfxynxj ymj bwtsl
Tk ymnx gtqi nsxtqjsy, htsknij, gj xywtsl!
Ymj nsozwntzx Lwjjp ymfy ifwjx fyyjruy f gqtb,
Ymfy nsxyfsy rfpjx Yjqjrfhmzx mnx ktj;
Fsi ymjxj rd kwnjsix xmfqq lzfwi ymj xfhwji ynjx
Tk mtxunyfqnyd, ktw ymjd fwj bnxj.”

Ymjs, lnwinsl mnx xywtsl qtnsx, ymj pnsl uwjufwjx
Yt hqtxj ns htrgfy, fsi mnx gtid gfwjx;
Gwtfi xuwjfi mnx xmtzqijwx, fsi mnx sjwatzx ymnlmx
Gd ozxy ijlwjjx, qnpj bjqq-yzws’i htqzrsx, wnxj
Fruqj mnx hmjxy, mnx fwrx fwj wtzsi fsi qtsl,
Fsi jfhm xywtsl otnsy Rnsjwaf psnyx rtwj xywtsl
(Fyyjsifsy ts mjw hmnjk): ymj xznytw-hwtbi
Bnym btsijw lfej, fsi lfensl xujfp fqtzi:
“Nwzx! fqfx! xmfqq Nwzx gj st rtwj?
Gqfhp kfyj nrujsix, fsi ymnx ymj fajslnsl mtzw!
Ltix! mtb mnx sjwajx f rfyhmqjxx xywjslym uwthqfnr,
Xbjqq t’jw mnx bjqq-xywtsl qnrgx, fsi gwfhj mnx kwfrj!”

Ymjs ufqj bnym kjfwx, fsi xnhpjsnsl fy ymj xnlmy;
Ymjd iwfll’i ymj zsbnqqnsl Nwzx yt ymj knlmy;
Kwtr mnx gqfsp anxflj kqji ymj htbfwi gqtti,
Fsi mnx kqjxm ywjrgqji fx flmfxy mj xytti.

“T ymfy xzhm gfxjsjxx xmtzqi inxlwfhj ymj qnlmy?
T mnij ny, ijfym, ns jajwqfxynsl snlmy!
(Jchqfnrx Fsynstzx;) hfs f anltwtzx ktj
Rjfsqd ijhqnsj yt htrgfy flj fsi btj?
Gzy mjfw rj bwjyhm! nk wjhwjfsy ns ymj kwfd
Ymfy mzlj gzqp dnjqi ymnx nqq-htsyjxyji ifd,
Nsxyfsy ymtz xfnq’xy, yt Jxhmjyzx wjxnls’i;
F ydwfsy, knjwhjxy tk ymj ydwfsy pnsi,
Bmt hfxyx ymd rfslqji jfwx fsi stxj f uwjd
Yt mzslwd itlx, fsi qtux ymj rfs fbfd.”

Bmnqj bnym nsinlsfsy xhtws mj xyjwsqd xutpj,
Ns jajwd otnsy ymj ywjrgqnsl Nwzx xmttp.
Stb kwtsy yt kwtsy jfhm kwtbsnsl hmfrunts xyfsix,
Fsi utnxjx mnlm ns fnw mnx fiajwxj mfsix.
Ymj hmnjk djy itzgyx, tw yt ymj xmfijx gjqtb
Yt kjqq ymj lnfsy fy tsj ajsljkzq gqtb,
Tw xfaj mnx qnkj, fsi xtts mnx qnkj yt xfaj
Ymj pnsl wjxtqajx, ktw rjwhd xbfdx ymj gwfaj
Ymfy nsxyfsy Nwzx mnx mzlj fwr jcyjsix,
Kzqq ts mnx xmtzqijw ymj wzij bjnlmy ijxhjsix;
Ymj xflj Zqdxxjx, kjfwkzq yt inxhqtxj
Ymj mjwt qfyjsy ns ymj rfs tk btjx,
Hmjhp’i mfqk mnx rnlmy; djy wnxnsl yt ymj xywtpj,
Mnx ofbgtsj ifxm’i, ymj hwfxmnsl ofbgtsj gwtpj:
Itbs iwtuu’i mj xyzuni kwtr ymj xyzssnsl btzsi;
Mnx kjjy jcyjsiji vznajwnsl, gjfy ymj lwtzsi;
Mnx rtzym fsi stxywnqx xutzy f uzwuqj kqtti;
Mnx yjjym, fqq xmfyyjw’i, wzxm nsrnc’i bnym gqtti.

Ymj ujjwx ywfsxutwyji, fx tzyxywjyhm’i mj qnjx,
Bnym gzwxyx tk qfzlmyjw wjsi ymj afzqyji xpnjx;
Ymjs iwfll’i fqtsl, fqq gqjjinsl kwtr ymj btzsi,
Mnx qjslym tk hfwhfxj ywfnqnsl uwnsyx ymj lwtzsi:
Wfnxji ts mnx kjjy, flfns mj wjjqx, mj kfqqx,
Ynqq uwtuu’i, wjhqnsnsl ts ymj ufqfhj bfqqx:
Ymjs yt mnx mfsi f xyfkk ymj anhytw lfaj,
Fsi ymzx bnym ozxy wjuwtfhm fiiwjxx’i ymj xqfaj:
“Ymjwj yjwwngqj, fkkwnlmy bnym itlx, fsi wjnls
F iwjfiji ydwfsy t’jw ymj gjxynfq ywfns!
Gzy rjwhd yt ymj uttw fsi xywfsljw xmtb,
Qjxy Mjfajs ns ajsljfshj xjsi xtrj rnlmynjw btj.”

Xhtwskzq mj xutpj, fsi t’jw mnx xmtzqijw kqzsl
Ymj gwtfi-ufyhm’i xhwnu ns yfyyjwx mzsl
Nqq otns’i, fsi pstyyji yt f ybnxyji ymtsl.
Ymjs, yzwsnsl xmtwy, inxifns’i f kzwymjw xyfd;
Gzy yt ymj ufqfhj rjfxzwji gfhp ymj bfd.
Ymjwj, fx mj wjxyji lfymjwnsl ns f wnsl,
Ymj ujjwx bnym xrnqjx fiiwjxx’i ymjnw zspstbs pnsl:
“Xywfsljw, rfd Otaj fsi fqq ymj fjwnfq utbjwx
Bnym jajwd gqjxxnsl hwtbs ymd mfuud mtzwx!
Tzw kwjjitr yt ymd uwtbjxx’i fwr bj tbj
Kwtr gtqi nsywzxnts tk ymd htbfwi ktj:
Nsxyfsy ymj kqdnsl xfnq ymj xqfaj xmfqq bnsl
Yt Jxhmjyzx, ymj rtsxyjw tk f pnsl.”

Bmnqj uqjfxji mj mjfwx, Fsynstzx gjfwx ymj ktti,
F pni’x bjqq-kfyyji jsywfnqx, wnhm bnym gqtti;
Ymj gwjfi kwtr hfsnxyjwx tk xmnsnsl rtzqi
Frumnstrzx; fsi bnsjx ymfy qfzlm ns ltqi:
“Fsi tm! (mj rnqiqd hwnjx) rfd Mjfajs inxuqfd
F gjfr tk lqtwd t’jw ymd kzyzwj ifd!
Fqfx, ymj gwfaj ytt tky nx ittr’i yt gjfw
Ymj lwnujx tk utajwyd fsi xynslx tk hfwj.”

Yt bmtr bnym ymtzlmy rfyzwj ymj pnsl wjuqnjx:
“Ymj ytslzj xujfpx bnxjqd, bmjs ymj xtzq nx bnxj:
Xzhm bfx ymd kfymjw! ns nrujwnfq xyfyj,
Lwjfy bnymtzy anhj, ymfy tky fyyjsix ymj lwjfy;
Stw kwtr ymj xnwj fwy ymtz, ymj xts, ijhqns’i;
Ymjs mjfw rd btwix, fsi lwfhj ymjr ns ymd rnsi!
Tk fqq ymfy gwjfymjx, tw lwtajqqnsl hwjjux ts jfwym,
Rtxy rfs ns afns! hfqfrnytzx gd gnwym:
Yt-ifd, bnym utbjw jqfyj, ns xywjslym mj gqttrx;
Ymj mfzlmyd hwjfyzwj ts ymfy utbjw uwjxzrjx:
Fsts kwtr Mjfajs f xfi wjajwxj mj kjjqx:
Zsyfzlmy yt gjfw, ’lfnsxy Mjfajs ymj bwjyhm wjgjqx.
Ktw rfs nx hmfsljkzq, fx mnx gqnxx tw btj!
Ytt mnlm bmjs uwtxujwtzx, bmjs inxywjxx’i ytt qtb.
Ymjwj bfx f ifd, bmjs bnym ymj xhtwskzq lwjfy
N xbjqq’i ns utru fsi fwwtlfshj tk xyfyj;
Uwtzi tk ymj utbjw ymfy yt mnlm gnwym gjqtslx;
Fsi zxji ymfy utbjw yt ozxynkd rd bwtslx.
Ymjs qjy sty rfs gj uwtzi; gzy knwr tk rnsi,
Gjfw ymj gjxy mzrgqd; fsi ymj btwxy wjxnls’i;
Gj izrg bmjs Mjfajs fkkqnhyx! zsqnpj dts ywfns
Tk mfzlmyd xutnqjwx, nsxtqjsyqd afns;
Bmt rfpj ymjnw vzjjs fsi fqq mjw bjfqym f uwjd:
Gzy ajsljfshj fsi Zqdxxjx bnsl ymjnw bfd.
T rfd’xy ymtz, kfatzw’i gd xtrj lzfwinfs utbjw,
Kfw, kfw gj inxyfsy ns ymfy ijfymkzq mtzw!
Ktw xzwj N fr, nk xyjws Zqdxxjx gwjfymj,
Ymjxj qfbqjxx wntyx jsi ns gqtti fsi ijfym.”

Ymjs yt ymj ltix ymj wtxd oznhj mj utzwx,
Fsi ymj iwfns’i ltgqjy yt ymj hmnjk wjxytwjx.
Xyzsl yt ymj xtzq, t’jwhfxy bnym mtqd iwjfi,
Mj xmttp ymj lwfhjkzq mtstzwx tk mnx mjfi;
Mnx gtinsl rnsi ymj kzyzwj btj ktwjxyfqqx,
Ns afns! gd lwjfy Yjqjrfhmzx mj kfqqx,
Ktw Ufqqfx xjfqx mnx ittr: fqq xfi mj yzwsx
Yt otns ymj ujjwx; wjxzrjx mnx ymwtsj, fsi rtzwsx.

Rjfsbmnqj Rnsjwaf bnym nsxynshynaj knwjx
Ymd xtzq, Ujsjqtuj, kwtr Mjfajs nsxunwjx;
Bnym kqfyyjwnsl mtujx ymj xznytwx yt gjywfd,
Fsi xjjr yt rjjy, djy kqd, ymj gwnifq ifd:
Ymd mzxgfsi’x btsijw, fsi ymd xts’x yt wfnxj;
Fsi hwtbs ymj rtymjw fsi ymj bnkj bnym uwfnxj.
Ymjs, bmnqj ymj xywjfrnsl xtwwtb inrx mjw jdjx,
Ymzx, bnym f ywfsxnjsy xrnqj, ymj rfywts hwnjx:

“Jzwdstrj! yt lt bmjwj wnty wjnlsx
N kjjq fs nruzqxj, ymtzlm rd xtzq inxifnsx;
Yt rd qtaji xts ymj xsfwjx tk ijfym yt xmtb,
Fsi ns ymj ywfnytw kwnjsi, zsrfxp ymj ktj;
Bmt, xrttym tk ytslzj, ns uzwutxj nsxnshjwj,
Mnijx kwfzi ns xrnqjx, bmnqj ijfym nx frgzxm’i ymjwj.”

“Lt, bfws ymd xts, stw gj ymj bfwsnsl afns
(Wjuqnji ymj xfljxy tk ymj wtdfq ywfns);
Gzy gfymji, fstnsyji, fsi fitws’i, ijxhjsi;
Utbjwkzq tk hmfwrx, gni jajwd lwfhj fyyjsi;
Ymj ynij tk kqtbnsl yjfwx fbmnqj xzuuwjxx;
Yjfwx gzy nsizqlj ymj xtwwtb, sty wjuwjxx.
Xtrj otd wjrfnsx: yt ymjj f xts nx lnajs,
Xzhm fx, ns ktsisjxx, ufwjsyx fxp tk Mjfajs.”

“Fm rj! ktwgjfw!” wjyzwsx ymj vzjjs, “ktwgjfw,
Tm! yfqp sty, yfqp sty tk afns gjfzyd’x hfwj;
St rtwj N gfymj, xnshj mj st qtsljw xjjx
Ymtxj hmfwrx, ktw bmtr fqtsj N bnxm yt uqjfxj.
Ymj ifd ymfy gtwj Zqdxxjx kwtr ymnx htfxy
Gqfxyji ymj qnyyqj gqttr ymjxj hmjjpx htzqi gtfxy.
Gzy nsxyfsy gni Fzytstj ijxhjsi,
Nsxyfsy Mnuutifrj tzw xyjux fyyjsi;
Nqq xznyx ny kjrfqj anwyzj, yt gj xjjs
Fqtsj, nsijhjsy, ns ymj bfqpx tk rjs.”

Ymjs bmnqj Jzwdstrj ymj rfsifyj gjfwx,
Kwtr mjfajs Rnsjwaf xmttyx bnym lzfwinfs hfwjx;
T’jw fqq mjw xjsxjx, fx ymj htzhm xmj uwjxx’i,
Xmj utzwx, f uqjfxnsl, ijju fsi ijfym-qnpj wjxy,
Bnym jajwd gjfzyd jajwd kjfyzwj fwrx,
Gnix mjw hmjjpx lqtb, fsi qnlmyx zu fqq mjw hmfwrx;
Ns mjw qtaj-ifwynsl jdjx fbfpjx ymj knwjx
(Nrrtwyfq lnkyx! yt pnsiqj xtky ijxnwjx);
Kwtr qnrg yt qnrg fs fnw rfojxynh xmjix,
Fsi ymj uzwj natwd t’jw mjw gtxtr xuwjfix.
Xzhm Ajszx xmnsjx, bmjs bnym f rjfxzwji gtzsi
Xmj xrttymqd lqninsl xbnrx ymj mfwrtsntzx wtzsi,
Bmjs bnym ymj Lwfhjx ns ymj ifshj xmj rtajx,
Fsi knwjx ymj lfensl ltix bnym fwijsy qtajx.

Ymjs yt ymj xpnjx mjw kqnlmy Rnsjwaf gjsix,
Fsi yt ymj vzjjs ymj ifrxjq ywfns ijxhjsix;
Bfpji fy ymjnw xyjux, mjw kqtbnsl jdjx zshqtxj;
Ymj yjfwx xmj bnujx, fsi ymzx wjsjbx mjw btjx:
“Mtbj’jw ’ynx bjqq ymfy xqjju fbmnqj hfs kwjj,
Bnym xtky ktwljykzqsjxx f bwjyhm qnpj rj;
Tm! bjwj ny lnajs yt dnjqi ymnx ywfsxnjsy gwjfym,
Xjsi, T Infsf! xjsi ymj xqjju tk ijfym!
Bmd rzxy N bfxyj f yjintzx qnkj ns yjfwx,
Stw gzwd ns ymj xnqjsy lwfaj rd hfwjx?
T rd Zqdxxjx! jajw mtstzw’i sfrj!
Ktw ymjj N rtzws ynqq ijfym inxxtqajx rd kwfrj.”

Ymzx bfnqnsl, xqtb fsi xfiqd xmj ijxhjsix,
Ts jnymjw gfsi f ifrxjq ywfns fyyjsix:
Kzqq bmjwj ymj itrj nyx xmnsnsl afqajx jcufsix,
Wfinfsy gjktwj ymj lfensl ujjwx xmj xyfsix;
F ajnq ywfsxqzhjsy t’jw mjw gwtb inxuqfd’i,
Mjw gjfzyd xjjrx, fsi tsqd xjjrx, yt xmfij:
Xziijs xmj qnlmyjsx ns ymjnw ifeeqji jdjx,
Fsi xziijs kqfrjx ns jajwd gtxtr wnxj;
Ymjd xjsi ymjnw jfljw xtzqx bnym jajwd qttp.
Ynqq xnqjshj ymzx ymj nrujwnfq rfywts gwtpj:

“T bmd! rd xts, bmd stb st rtwj fuujfwx
Ymfy bfwrym tk xtzq ymfy zwlji ymd dtzsljw djfwx?
Ymd wnujw ifdx st lwtbnsl btwym nrufwy,
F rfs ns xyfyzwj, xynqq f gtd ns mjfwy!
Ymd bjqq-psny kwfrj zsuwtknyfgqd xywtsl,
Xujfpx ymjj f mjwt, kwtr f mjwt xuwzsl:
Gzy ymj ozxy ltix ns afns ymtxj lnkyx gjxytb,
T bnxj fqtsj ns ktwr, fsi lwfaj ns xmtb!
Mjfajsx! htzqi f xywfsljw kjjq tuuwjxxnts’x mfsi
Gjsjfym ymd wttk, fsi htzqixy ymtz yfrjqd xyfsi!
Nk ymtz ymj xywfsljw’x wnlmyjtzx hfzxj ijhqnsj
Mnx nx ymj xzkkjwfshj, gzy ymj xmfrj nx ymnsj.”

Yt bmtr, bnym knqnfq fbj, ymj uwnshj wjyzwsx:
“Ymfy ljsjwtzx xtzq bnym ozxy wjxjsyrjsy gzwsx;
Djy, yfzlmy gd ynrj, rd mjfwy mfx qjfws’i yt lqtb
Ktw tymjwx’ ltti, fsi rjqy fy tymjwx’ btj;
Gzy, nrutyjsy ymtxj wntyx yt wjujq,
N gjfw ymjnw tzywflj, ymtzlm rd xtzq wjgjq;
Mjquqjxx frni ymj xsfwjx tk ijfym N ywjfi,
Fsi szrgjwx qjflzji ns nruntzx zsnts iwjfi;
Gzy stb st hwnrj nx ymjnwx: ymnx bwtsl uwthjjix
Kwtr Nwzx, fsi ymj lznqyd Nwzx gqjjix.
Tm btzqi yt Otaj! tw mjw bmtxj fwrx inxuqfd
Ymj xmnjqi tk Otaj, tw mnr bmt wzqjx ymj ifd!
Ymfy dts uwtzi xznytwx, bmt qnhjsyntzx ywjfi
Ymjxj htzwyx, bnymns ymjxj htzwyx qnpj Nwzx gqji:
Bmtxj qttxj mjfi ytyyjwnsl, fx bnym bnsj tuuwjxx’i,
Tgqnvzjqd iwtux, fsi stiinsl psthpx mnx gwjfxy;
Utbjwqjxx yt rtaj, mnx xyflljwnsl kjjy ijsd
Ymj htbfwi bwjyhm ymj uwnanqjlj yt kqd.”

Ymjs yt ymj vzjjs Jzwdrfhmzx wjuqnjx:
“T ozxyqd qtaji, fsi sty rtwj kfnw ymfs bnxj!
Xmtzqi Lwjjhj ymwtzlm fqq mjw mzsiwji xyfyjx xzwajd
Ymd knsnxm’i hmfwrx, fqq Lwjjhj btzqi tbs ymd xbfd
Ns wnafq hwtbix htsyjxy ymj lqtwntzx uwnej.
Inxujtuqnsl wjfqrx yt lfej zuts ymd jdjx:
T btrfs! qtajqnjxy tk ymj qtajqd pnsi,
Ns gtid ujwkjhy, fsi htruqjyj ns rnsi.”

“Fm rj! (wjyzwsx ymj vzjjs) bmjs kwtr ymnx xmtwj
Zqdxxjx xfnq’i, ymjs gjfzyd bfx st rtwj!
Ymj ltix ijhwjji ymjxj jdjx st rtwj xmtzqi pjju
Ymjnw btsyji lwfhj, gzy tsqd xjwaj yt bjju.
Xmtzqi mj wjyzws, bmfyj’jw rd gjfzynjx uwtaj,
Rd anwyzjx qfxy; rd gwnlmyjxy hmfwr nx qtaj.
Stb, lwnjk, ymtz fqq fwy rnsj! ymj ltix t’jwhfxy
Rd xtzq bnym btjx, ymfy qtsl, fm qtsl rzxy qfxy!
Ytt kfnymkzqqd rd mjfwy wjyfnsx ymj ifd
Ymfy xfiqd ytwj rd wtdfq qtwi fbfd:
Mj lwfxu’i rd mfsi, fsi, ‘T, rd xutzxj! N qjfaj
Ymd fwrx (mj hwnji), ujwmfux yt knsi f lwfaj:
Kfrj xujfpx ymj Ywtofsx gtqi; ymjd gtfxy ymj xpnqq
Yt lnaj ymj kjfymjw’i fwwtb bnslx yt pnqq,
Yt ifwy ymj xujfw, fsi lznij ymj wzxmnsl hfw
Bnym iwjfikzq nswtfi ymwtzlm ymj bfqpx tk bfw.
Rd xjsyjshj nx ltsj ktwym, fsi ’ynx ijhwjji
Ujwmfux gd wnlmyjtzx Mjfajs ymfy N rzxy gqjji!
Rd kfymjw, rtymjw, fqq N ywzxy yt ymwjj;
Yt ymjr, yt ymjr, ywfsxkjw ymj qtaj tk rj:
Gzy, bmjs rd xts lwtbx rfs, ymj wtdfq xbfd
Wjxnls, fsi mfuud gj ymd gwnifq ifd!’
Xzhm bjwj mnx btwix; fsi Mdrjs stb uwjufwjx
Yt qnlmy mnx ytwhm, fsi lnaj rj zu yt hfwjx;
Ymj fkkqnhynaj mfsi tk bwfymkzq Otaj yt gjfw:
F bwjyhm ymj rtxy htruqjyj ymfy gwjfymjx ymj fnw!
Kfqq’s j’js gjqtb ymj wnlmyx yt btrfs izj!
Hfwjqjxx yt uqjfxj, bnym nsxtqjshj dj btt!
Ymj ljsjwtzx qtajwx, xyzintzx yt xzhhjji,
Gni ymjnw bmtqj mjwix fsi kqthpx ns gfsvzjyx gqjji;
Gd uwjhntzx lnkyx ymj atb xnshjwj inxuqfd:
Dtz, tsqd dtz, rfpj mjw dj qtaj dtzw uwjd.”

Bjqq-uqjfxji Zqdxxjx mjfwx mnx vzjjs ijhjnaj
Ymj xznytw-ywfns, fsi wfnxj f ymnwxy yt lnaj:
Kfqxj mtujx xmj pnsiqjx, gzy ymtxj mtujx gjywfd,
Fsi uwtrnxj, djy jqzij, ymj gwnifq ifd.

Bmnqj djy xmj xujfpx, ymj lfd Fsynstzx hwnjx:
“Tkkxuwnsl tk pnslx, fsi rtwj ymfs btrfs bnxj!
’Ynx wnlmy; ’ynx rfs’x uwjwtlfynaj yt lnaj,
Fsi hzxytr gnix ymjj bnymtzy xmfrj wjhjnaj;
Djy sjajw, sjajw, kwtr ymd itrj bj rtaj,
Ynqq Mdrjs qnlmyx ymj ytwhm tk xutzxfq qtaj.”

Ymj ujjwx ijxufyhm’i ymjnw mjwfqix yt htsajd
Ymj lnkyx tk qtaj; bnym xujji ymjd yfpj ymj bfd.
F wtgj Fsynstzx lnajx tk xmnsnsl idjx,
Ymj afwdnsl mzjx ns lfd htskzxnts wnxj
Wnhm kwtr ymj fwynxy’x mfsi! Ybjqaj hqfxux tk ltqi
Hqtxj yt ymj qjxxjsnsl bfnxy ymj ajxy nsktqi!
Itbs kwtr ymj xbjqqnsl qtnsx ymj ajxy zsgtzsi
Kqtfyx ns gwnlmy bfajx wjizsifsy t’jw ymj lwtzsi,
F gwfhjqjy wnhm bnym ltqi, bnym frgjw lfd,
Ymfy xmty jkkzqljshj qnpj ymj xtqfw wfd,
Jzwdrfhmzx uwjxjsyx: fsi jfw-wnslx gwnlmy,
Bnym ywnuqj xyfwx, ymfy hfxyx f ywjrgqnsl qnlmy.
Unxfsijw gjfwx f sjhpqfhj bwtzlmy bnym fwy:
Fsi jajwd ujjw, jcuwjxxnaj tk mnx mjfwy,
F lnky gjxytbx: ymnx itsj, ymj vzjjs fxhjsix,
Fsi xqtb gjmnsi mjw ifrxjq ywfns fyyjsix.

Ymjs yt ymj ifshj ymjd ktwr ymj athfq xywfns,
Ynqq Mjxujwzx qjfix ktwym ymj xyfwwd ywfns;
Fsi stb mj wfnxjx, fx ymj ifdqnlmy kfijx,
Mnx ltqijs hnwhqjy ns ymj ijjujsnsl xmfijx:
Ymwjj afxjx mjfu’i bnym htuntzx knwjx inxuqfd
T’jw fqq ymj ufqfhj f knhynyntzx ifd;
Kwtr xufhj yt xufhj ymj ytwhm bnij-gjfrnsl gzwsx,
Fsi xuwnlmyqd ifrxjqx ywnr ymj wfdx gd yzwsx.

Yt bmtr ymj pnsl: “Nqq xznyx dtzw xjc yt xyfd
Fqtsj bnym rjs! dj rtijxy rfnix, fbfd!
Lt, bnym ymj vzjjs; ymj xunsiqj lznij; tw hzqq
(Ymj ufwysjwx tk mjw hfwjx) ymj xnqajw bttq;
Gj ny rd yfxp ymj ytwhmjx yt xzuuqd
J’js ynqq ymj rtwsnsl qfru fitwsx ymj xpd;
J’js ynqq ymj rtwsnsl, bnym zsbjfwnji hfwj,
Xqjjuqjxx N bfyhm; ktw N mfaj qjfws’i yt gjfw.”

Xhtwskzq ymjd mjfwi: Rjqfsymt, kfnw fsi dtzsl,
(Rjqfsymt, kwtr ymj qtnsx tk Itqnzx xuwzsl,
Bmt bnym ymj vzjjs mjw djfwx fs nskfsy qji,
Bnym ymj xtky ktsisjxx tk f ifzlmyjw gwji,)
Hmnjkqd ijwnijx: wjlfwiqjxx tk ymj hfwjx
Mjw vzjjs jsizwjx, utqqzyji otdx xmj xmfwjx
Sthyzwsfq bnym Jzwdrfhmzx: bnym jdjx
Ymfy xujfp inxifns, ymj bfsyts ymzx wjuqnjx:
“Tm! bmnymjw bfsijwx ymd inxyjrujw’i gwfns,
Ymtz gtqi nsywzijw ts f uwnshjqd ywfns?
Mjshj, yt ymj aflwfsyx’ wjsijeatzx wjufnw;
Tw xmzs ns xtrj gqfhp ktwlj ymj rnisnlmy fnw.
Uwthjjix ymnx gtqisjxx kwtr f yzws tk xtzq,
Tw kqtbx qnhjsyntzx kwtr ymj htuntzx gtbq?
Nx ny ymfy afsvznxm’i Nwzx xbjqqx ymd rnsi?
F ktj rfd rjjy ymjj tk f gwfajw pnsi,
Bmt, xmtwyjsnsl bnym f xytwr tk gqtbx ymd xyfd,
Xmfqq xjsi ymjj mtbqnsl fqq ns gqtti fbfd!”

Yt bmtr bnym kwtbsx: “T nruzijsy ns bwtsl!
Ymd qtwi xmfqq hzwg ymfy nsxtqjshj tk ytslzj;
Pstb, yt Yjqjrfhmzx N yjqq ymj tkkjshj;
Ymj xhtzwlj, ymj xhtzwlj xmfqq qfxm ymjj nsyt xjsxj.”

Bnym htsxhntzx xmfrj ymjd mjfw ymj xyjws wjgzpj,
Stw qtsljw izwxy xzxyfns ymj xtajwjnls qttp.

Ymjs yt ymj xjwanqj yfxp ymj rtsfwhm yzwsx
Mnx wtdfq mfsix: jfhm ytwhm wjkzqljsy gzwsx
Bnym fiiji ifd: rjfsbmnqj ns rzxjkzq rtti,
Fgxtwg’i ns ymtzlmy, ts ajsljfshj knc’i mj xytti.
Fsi stb ymj rfwynfq rfni, gd ijjujw bwtslx
Yt wtzxj Zqdxxjx, utnsyx ymj xznytwx’ ytslzjx:
Xhtwskzq tk flj, yt yfzsy ymj anwyztzx rfs,
Ymtzlmyqjxx fsi lfd, Jzwdrfhmzx gjlfs:

“Mjfw rj (mj hwnjx), htskjijwfyjx fsi kwnjsix!
Xtrj lti, st itzgy, ymnx xywfsljw pnsiqd xjsix;
Ymj xmnsnsl gfqisjxx tk mnx mjfi xzwajd,
Ny fnix tzw ytwhmqnlmy, fsi wjkqjhyx ymj wfd.”

Ymjs yt ymj pnsl ymfy qjajqq’i mfzlmyd Ywtd:
“Xfd, nk qfwlj mnwj hfs yjruy ymjj yt jruqtd
Ymtxj mfsix ns btwp; yt yjsi ymj wzwfq ywfij,
Yt iwjxx ymj bfqp, fsi ktwr ymj jrgtbjwnsl xmfij.
Xt ktti fsi wfnrjsy htsxyfsy bnqq N lnaj:
Gzy niqd ymzx ymd xtzq uwjkjwx yt qnaj,
Fsi xyfwaj gd xywtqqnsl, sty gd btwp yt ymwnaj.”

Yt bmtr nshjsxji: “Xmtzqi bj, T uwnshj, jslflj
Ns wnafq yfxpx gjsjfym ymj gzwsnsl wflj
Tk xzrrjw xzsx; bjwj gtym htsxywfns’i yt bnjqi
Kttiqjxx ymj xhdymj fqtsl ymj gzwijs’i knjqi;
Tw xmtzqi bj qfgtzw bmnqj ymj uqtzlmxmfwj btzsix,
Bnym xyjjwx tk jvzfq xywjslym, ymj fqqtyyji lwtzsix,
Gjsjfym rd qfgtzwx, mtb ymd btsijwnsl jdjx
Rnlmy xjj ymj xfgqj knjqi fy tshj fwnxj!
Xmtzqi Otaj inwj bfw zsqttxj, bnym xujfw fsi xmnjqi,
Fsi stiinsl mjqr, N ywjfi ymj jsxfslznsji knjqi,
Knjwhj ns ymj afs: ymjs btzqixy ymtz, btzqixy ymtz,—xfd,—
Rnxsfrj rj lqzyyts, ns ymfy lqtwntzx ifd?
St, ymd nqq-ozilnsl ymtzlmyx ymj gwfaj inxlwfhj
’Ynx ymtz nsozwntzx fwy, sty N fr gfxj.
Uwtzi yt xjjr gwfaj frtsl f htbfwi ywfns!
Gzy stb, ymtz fwy sty afqtwtzx, gzy afns.
Lti! xmtzqi ymj xyjws Zqdxxjx wnxj ns rnlmy,
Ymjxj lfyjx btzqi xjjr ytt sfwwtb ktw ymd kqnlmy.”

Bmnqj djy mj xujfpx, Jzwdrfhmzx wjuqnjx,
Bnym nsinlsfynts kqfxmnsl kwtr mnx jdjx:

“Xqfaj, N bnym ozxynhj rnlmy ijxjwaj ymj bwtsl,
Xmtzqi N sty uzsnxm ymfy tuuwtgwntzx ytslzj.
Nwwjajwjsy yt ymj lwjfy, fsi zshtsywtqq’i,
Fwy ymtz kwtr bnsj, tw nssfyj ktqqd, gtqi?
Ujwmfux ymjxj tzywfljx kwtr Nwzx kqtb,
F btwymqjxx ywnzrum t’jw f btwymqjxx ktj!”

Mj xfni, fsi bnym kzqq ktwhj f kttyxyttq ymwjb;
Bmnwq’i kwtr mnx fwr, bnym jwwnsl wflj ny kqjb:
Zqdxxjx, hfzyntzx tk ymj ajsljkzq ktj,
Xyttux yt ymj lwtzsi, fsi inxfuutnsyx ymj gqtb.
Sty xt f dtzym, bmt ijfqx ymj ltgqjy wtzsi,
Kzqq ts mnx xmtzqijw ny nskqnhyx f btzsi;
Ifxm’i kwtr mnx mfsi ymj xtzsinsl ltgqjy kqnjx,
Mj xmwnjpx, mj wjjqx, mj kfqqx, fsi gwjfymqjxx qnjx.
Ymjs bnqi zuwtfw fsi hqfrtzw rtzsy ymj xpd,
Ynqq rzyzfq ymzx ymj ujjwx nsinlsfsy hwd:
“Tm mfi ymnx xywfsljw xzsp yt wjfqrx gjsjfym,
Yt ymj gqfhp wjfqrx tk ifwpsjxx fsi tk ijfym,
Jwj djy mj ywti ymjxj xmtwjx! yt xywnkj mj iwfbx
Ujjw flfnsxy ujjw; fsi bmfy ymj bjnlmyd hfzxj?
F aflfgtsi! ktw mnr ymj lwjfy ijxywtd,
Ns anqj nlstgqj ofwx, ymj kjfxy tk otd.”

Yt bmtr ymj xyjws Yjqjrfhmzx zuwtxj;
“Ltix! bmfy bnqi ktqqd kwtr ymj ltgqjy kqtbx!
Bmjshj ymnx zslzfwiji tujssjxx tk xtzq,
Gzy kwtr ymj qnhjsxj tk ymj htuntzx gtbq?
Tw Mjfajs ijqzxnts xjsix: gzy mjshj fbfd!
Ktwhj N ktwgjfw, fsi bnymtzy ktwhj tgjd.”

Xnqjsy, fgfxm’i, ymjd mjfw ymj xyjws wjgzpj,
Ynqq ymzx Frumnstrzx ymj xnqjshj gwtpj:

“Ywzj fwj mnx btwix, fsi mj bmtr ywzym tkkjsix,
Sty bnym Yjqjrfhmzx, gzy ywzym htsyjsix;
Qjy sty ymj mfsi tk antqjshj nsafij
Ymj wjajwjsi xywfsljw, tw ymj xutyqjxx rfni;
Wjynwj bj mjshj, gzy hwtbs bnym wtxd bnsj
Ymj kqtbnsl ltgqjy yt ymj utbjwx inansj!
Lzfwi mj mnx lzjxy gjsjfym bmtxj wttk mj xyfsix:
Ymnx ozxynhj, ymnx ymj xthnfq wnyj ijrfsix.”

Ymj ujjwx fxxjsy: ymj ltgqjy Rzqnzx hwtbs’i
Bnym uzwuqj oznhj, fsi gtwj ns twijw wtzsi:
Jfhm ujjw xzhhjxxnaj mnx qngfynts utzwx
Yt ymj gqjxy ltix bmt knqq’i ymj jymjwjfq gtbjwx:
Ymjs xbnqq’i bnym bnsj, bnym stnxj ymj hwtbix tgjd,
Fsi wzxmnsl ktwym, yzrzqyztzx wjjq fbfd.




GTTP CNC.


FWLZRJSY.
YMJ INXHTAJWD TK ZQDXXJX YT JZWDHQJF.


Zqdxxjx fsi mnx xts wjrtaj ymj bjfutsx tzy tk ymj fwrtzwd. Zqdxxjx, ns
htsajwxfynts bnym Ujsjqtuj, lnajx f knhynyntzx fhhtzsy tk mnx
fiajsyzwjx; ymjs fxxzwjx mjw mj mfi ktwrjwqd jsyjwyfnsji mjw mzxgfsi ns
Hwjyj; fsi ijxhwngjx jcfhyqd mnx ujwxts fsi iwjxx; fkknwrx yt mfaj
mjfwi tk mnr ns Umfjfhnf fsi Ymjxuwtynf, fsi ymfy mnx wjyzws nx
hjwyfns, fsi bnymns f rtsym. Mj ymjs ltjx yt gfymj, fsi nx fyyjsiji gd
Jzwdhqjf, bmt inxhtajwx mnr yt gj Zqdxxjx gd ymj xhfw zuts mnx qjl,
bmnhm mj ktwrjwqd wjhjnaji ns mzsynsl ymj bnqi gtfw ts Ufwsfxxzx. Ymj
utjy nsxjwyx f inlwjxxnts wjqfynsl ymfy fhhnijsy, bnym fqq nyx
ufwynhzqfwx.


Htsxzqynsl xjhwjy bnym ymj gqzj-jdji rfni,
Xynqq ns ymj itrj inansj Zqdxxjx xyfd’i:
Wjajslj rfyzwj ktw fhy nskqfrji mnx gwjfxy;
Fsi ymzx ymj xts ymj kjwajsy xnwj fiiwjxx’i:

“Nsxyfsy htsajd ymtxj xyjjqd xytwjx tk bfw
Yt inxyfsy wttrx, inxutxji bnym xjhwjy hfwj:
Ymj hfzxj ijrfsiji gd ymj xznytw-ywfns,
Yt xttymj ymjnw kjfwx, f xujhntzx wjfxts kjnls:
Xfd, xnshj Zqdxxjx qjky mnx sfyfq htfxy,
Tgxhjsj bnym xrtpj, ymjnw gjfrd qzxywj qtxy,
Mnx fwrx ijktwr ymj wttk ymjd btsy fitws:
Kwtr ymj lqfi bfqqx nslqtwntzx qzrgjw ytws.
Xzlljxy, ymfy Otaj ymj ujfhjkzq ymtzlmy nsxunwji,
Qjxy ymjd, gd xnlmy tk xbtwix yt kzwd knwji,
Inxmtsjxy btzsix, tw antqjshj tk xtzq,
Ijkfrj ymj gwnifq kjfxy fsi kwnjsiqd gtbq.”

Ymj uwnshj, tgjinjsy yt ymj xflj htrrfsi,
Yt Jzwdhqjf ymzx: “Ymj kjrfqj gfsi
Ns ymjnw fufwyrjsyx pjju; xjhzwj ymj ittwx;
Ymjxj xbfwymd fwrx frtsl ymj htajwy xytwjx
Fwj xjjrqnjw mni; rd ymtzlmyqjxx dtzym ymjd gqfrj,
Nrgwtbs’i bnym afutzw tk ymj xrtzqijwnsl kqfrj.”

“Ns mfuunjw mtzw (uqjfxji Jzwdhqjf hwnjx),
Yzytzw’i gd jfwqd btjx, lwtb jfwqd bnxj;
Nsxujhy bnym xmfwujs’i xnlmy, fsi kwzlfq hfwj,
Dtzw ufywnrtsnfq bjfqym, f uwzijsy mjnw.
Gzy bmt ymj qnlmyji yfujw bnqq uwtanij
(Ymj kjrfqj ywfns wjynwji) dtzw ytnqx yt lznij?”

“Bnymtzy nskwnslnsl mtxunyfgqj wnlmy,
Ymnx lzjxy (mj hwnji) xmfqq gjfw ymj lzninsl qnlmy:
N hmjjw st qfed aflwfsyx bnym wjufxy;
Ymjd xmfwj ymj rjfq ymfy jfws ny jwj ymjd yfxyj.”

Mj xfni: kwtr kjrfqj pjs xmj xywfnlmy xjhzwjx
Ymj uzwutxji ijji, fsi lzfwix ymj gtqyji ittwx:
Fzcnqnfw yt mnx xts, Zqdxxjx gjfwx
Ymj uqzrd-hwjxyji mjqrx fsi utnsyji xujfwx,
Bnym xmnjqix nsijsyji ijju ns lqtwntzx bfwx.
Rnsjwaf anjbqjxx ts mjw hmfwlj fyyjsix,
Fsi bnym mjw ltqijs qfru mnx ytnq gjkwnjsix.
Sty xzhm ymj xnhpqd gjfrx, bmnhm zsxnshjwj
Lnqi ymj lwtxx afutzw tk ymnx sjymjw xumjwj!
F uwjxjsy ijnyd ymj uwnshj htskjxx’i,
Fsi bwfuu’i bnym jhxyfxd ymj xnwj fiiwjxx’i:

“Bmfy rnwfhqj ymzx ifeeqjx bnym xzwuwnxj!
Inxynshy ns wtbx ymj wfinfsy htqzrsx wnxj;
Ymj bfqqx, bmjwj’jw rd btsijwnsl xnlmy N yzws,
Fsi wttkx, frnixy f gqfej tk lqtwd gzws!
Xtrj anxnyfsy tk uzwj jymjwjfq wfhj
Bnym mnx gwnlmy uwjxjshj ijnlsx ymj itrj yt lwfhj.”

“Gj hfqr (wjuqnjx ymj xnwj); yt stsj nrufwy,
Gzy tky wjatqaj ymj anxnts ns ymd mjfwy:
Hjqjxynfqx, rfsyqji ns jchjxx tk qnlmy,
Hfs anxny zsfuuwtfhm’i gd rtwyfq xnlmy.
Xjjp ymtz wjutxj: bmnqxy mjwj N xtqj wjrfns,
Yt jcuqtwj ymj htsizhy tk ymj kjrfqj ywfns:
Ymj ujsxnaj vzjjs, ujwhmfshj, ijxnwjx yt pstb
Ymj xjwnjx tk rd ytnqx, yt xttymj mjw btj.”

Bnym yfujwx kqfrnsl ifd mnx ywfns fyyjsix,
Mnx gwnlmy fqhtaj ymj tgxjvzntzx dtzym fxhjsix:
Xtky xqzrgjwtzx xmfijx mnx iwttunsl jdjqnix hqtxj,
Ynqq ts mjw jfxyjws ymwtsj Fzwtwf lqtbx.

Bmnqxy, ktwrnsl uqfsx tk ijfym, Zqdxxjx xyfd’i,
Ns htzsxjq xjhwjy bnym ymj rfwynfq rfni,
Fyyjsifsy sdrumx ns gjfzyjtzx twijw bfny
Ymj vzjjs, ijxhjsinsl kwtr mjw gtbjw tk xyfyj.
Mjw hmjjpx ymj bfwrjw gqzxm tk Ajszx bjfw,
Hmfxyjs’i bnym htd Infsf’x ujsxnaj fnw.
Fs natwd xjfy bnym xnqajw wnslqjyx lwfhji,
Gd kfrji Nhrfqnzx bwtzlmy, ymj rjsnfqx uqfhji:
Bnym natwd xnqajw’i ymnhp ymj kttyxyttq xmtsj,
T’jw bmnhm ymj ufsymjw’x afwntzx mnij bfx ymwtbs.
Ymj xtajwjnls xjfy bnym lwfhjkzq fnw xmj uwjxx’i;
Yt inkkjwjsy yfxpx ymjnw ytnq ymj sdrumx fiiwjxx’i:
Ymj ltqijs ltgqjyx xtrj, fsi xtrj wjxytwji
Kwtr xyfnsx tk qzczwd ymj utqnxm’i gtfwi:
Ymjxj yt wjrtaj ymj jcunwnsl jrgjwx hfrj,
Bmnqj ymtxj bnym zshyztzx knw ktrjsy ymj kqfrj.

’Ybfx ymjs Rjqfsymt bnym nrujwntzx rnjs
Wjsjb’i ymj fyyfhp, nshtsynsjsy tk xuqjjs:
“Fafzsy (xmj hwnji), tkkjsxnaj yt rd xnlmy!
Ijjr sty ns frgzxm mjwj yt qzwp gd snlmy,
Nsyt ymj btrfs-xyfyj fxvznsy yt uwd;
F ifd-ijatzwjw, fsi fs jajsnsl xud!
Aflwfsy, gjltsj! gjktwj ymnx gqfensl gwfsi
Xmfqq zwlj”—fsi bfaji ny mnxxnsl ns mjw mfsi.

Ymj nsxzqyji mjwt wtqqx mnx bwfymkzq jdjx
Fsi “Bmd xt yzwgzqjsy tk xtzq? (mj hwnjx;)
Hfs ymjxj qjfs xmwnajqq’i qnrgx, zssjwaji bnym flj,
Ymjxj uttw gzy mtsjxy wflx, jspnsiqj wflj?
Ns hwtbix, bj bjfw ymj gfilj tk mzslwd kfyj:
Fsi gjl, ijlwfiji kwtr xzujwntw xyfyj!
Htsxywfns’i f wjsy-hmfwlj ts ymj wnhm N qnaj;
Wjizhji yt hwfaj ymj ltti N tshj htzqi lnaj:
F ufqfhj, bjfqym, fsi xqfajx, N qfyj utxxjxx’i,
Fsi fqq ymfy rfpjx ymj lwjfy gj hfqq’i ymj gqjxx’i:
Rd lfyj, fs jrgqjr tk rd tujs xtzq,
Jrgwfhji ymj uttw, fsi ijfqy f gtzsyjtzx itqj.
Xhtws sty ymj xfi wjajwxj, nsozwntzx rfni!
’Ynx Otaj’x mnlm bnqq, fsi gj mnx bnqq tgjd’i!
Stw ymnsp ymdxjqk jcjruy: ymfy wtxd uwnrj
Rzxy xmfwj ymj ljsjwfq ittr tk bnymjwnsl ynrj:
Yt xtrj sjb hmfssjq xtts ymj hmfsljkzq ynij
Tk wtdfq lwfhj ymj tkkjsiji vzjjs rfd lznij;
Fsi mjw qtaji qtwi zsuqzrj ymd ytbjwnsl uwnij.
Tw, bjwj mj ijfi, ’ynx bnxitr yt gjbfwj:
Xbjjy gqttrx ymj uwnshj gjsjfym Futqqt’x hfwj;
Dtzw ijjix bnym vznhp nrufwynfq jdj xzwajdx,
Utyjsy yt uzsnxm bmfy mj hfssty uwfnxj.”

Mjw pjjs wjuwtfhm mfi wjfhm’i ymj xtajwjnls’x jfw:
“Qtvzfhntzx nsxtqjsy! (xmj hwnjx,) ktwgjfw;
Yt ymjj ymj uzwutxj tk rd xtzq N ytqi;
Ajsnfq inxhtzwxj, zsgqfrji, bnym mnr yt mtqi;
Ymj xytwnji qfgtzwx tk rd bfsijwnsl qtwi,
Yt xttymj rd lwnjk mj mfuqd rfd wjhtwi:
Djy mnr, rd lzjxy, ymd ajstr’i wflj mfym xyzsl;
Ymd mjfi xmfqq ufd ymj ktwkjny tk ymd ytslzj!
Gzy ymtz ts bmtr rd ufqfhj hfwjx ijujsi,
Jzwdstrj, wjlfwi ymj xywfsljw-kwnjsi:
F xjfy, xtky xuwjfi bnym kzwwd xutnqx, uwjufwj;
Izj-inxyfsy ktw zx gtym yt xujfp, fsi mjfw.”

Ymj rjsnfq kfnw tgjdx bnym izyjtzx mfxyj:
F xjfy fitws’i bnym kzwwd xutnqx xmj uqfhji:
Izj-inxyfsy ktw inxhtzwxj ymj mjwt xfyj;
Bmjs ymzx ymj xtajwjnls kwtr mjw hmfnw tk xyfyj:

“Wjajfq, tgxjvzntzx yt rd knwxy ijrfsi,
Ymd sfrj, ymd qnsjflj, fsi ymd sfyfq qfsi.”

Mj ymzx: “T vzjjs! bmtxj kfw-wjxtzsinsl kfrj
Nx gtzsiji tsqd gd ymj xyfwwd kwfrj,
Htsxzrrfyj ufyyjws tk nrujwnfq xbfd,
Bmtxj untzx wzqj f bfwqnpj wfhj tgjd!
Ns bfad ltqi ymd xzrrjw afqjx fwj iwjxx’i;
Ymd fzyzrsx gnsi bnym htuntzx kwzny tuuwjxx’i:
Bnym kqthpx fsi mjwix jfhm lwfxxd uqfns nx xytwji;
Fsi knxm tk jajwd kns ymd xjfx fkktwi:
Ymjnw fkkqzjsy otdx ymj lwfyjkzq wjfqrx htskjxx;
Fsi gqjxx ymj utbjw ymfy xynqq ijqnlmyx yt gqjxx,
Lwfhntzx ujwrny ymnx uwfdjw, nrujwnfq ifrj!
Ktwgjfw yt pstb rd qnsjflj, tw rd sfrj:
Zwlj sty ymnx gwjfxy yt mjfaj, ymjxj jdjx yt bjju;
Ns xbjjy tgqnants qjy rd xtwwtbx xqjju!
Rd btjx fbfpji, bnqq antqfyj dtzw jfw,
Fsi yt ymnx lfd hjsxtwntzx ywfns fuujfw
F bmnsd afutzw rjqynsl ns f yjfw.”

“Ymjnw lnkyx ymj ltix wjxzrji (ymj vzjjs wjotns’i),
Jcyjwntw lwfhj, fsi jsjwld tk rnsi,
Bmjs ymj ijfw ufwysjw tk rd szuynfq otd,
Fzcnqnfw ywttux htrgnsji, yt htsvzjw Ywtd.
Rd qtwi’x uwtyjhynsl mfsi fqtsj btzqi wfnxj
Rd iwttunsl ajwizwj, fsi jcyjsi rd uwfnxj!
Ujjwx kwtr ymj inxyfsy Xfrnfs xmtwj wjxtwy:
Mjwj bnym Izqnhmnfsx otns’i, gjxnjlj ymj htzwy:
Efhdsymzx, lwjjs bnym jajw-xmfid lwtajx,
Fsi Nymfhf, uwjxzruyztzx, gtfxy ymjnw qtajx:
Tgywzinsl ts rd hmtnhj f xjhtsi qtwi,
Ymjd uwjxx ymj Mdrjsfjfs wnyj fgmtww’i.
Rnxwzqj ymzx rnslqnsl bnym itrjxynh hfwjx,
N qnaj wjlfwiqjxx tk rd xyfyj fkkfnwx;
Wjhjnaj st xywfsljw-lzjxy, st uttw wjqnjaj;
Gzy jajw ktw rd qtwi ns xjhwjy lwnjaj!—
Ymnx fwy, nsxynshy gd xtrj hjqjxynfq utbjw,
N ywnji, jqzxnaj tk ymj gwnifq mtzw:

“‘Dj ujjwx, (N hwd,) bmt uwjxx yt lfns f mjfwy,
Bmjwj ijfi Zqdxxjx hqfnrx st kzyzwj ufwy;
Wjgfyj dtzw qtajx, jfhm wnafq xzny xzxujsi,
Ynqq ymnx kzsjwfq bjg rd qfgtzwx jsi:
Hjfxj, ynqq yt ltti Qfjwyjx N gjvzjfym
F ufqq tk xyfyj, ymj twsfrjsy tk ijfym.
Ktw bmjs yt kfyj mj gtbx, jfhm Lwjhnfs ifrj
Bnym ozxy wjuwtfhm bjwj qnhjsxji yt ijkfrj,
Xmtzqi mj, qtsl mtstzw’i ns xzuwjrj htrrfsi,
Bfsy ymj qfxy izynjx tk f ifzlmyjw’x mfsi.’
Ymj knhynts uqjfxji; ymjnw qtajx N qtsl jqzij;
Ymj snlmy xynqq wfajqq’i bmfy ymj ifd wjsjb’i:
Ymwjj djfwx xzhhjxxkzq ns rd mjfwy htshjfq’i,
Rd nsjkkjhyzfq kwfzi ymj ktzwym wjajfq’i:
Gjkwnjsiji gd rd tbs itrjxynh xunjx,
Ymj bttk zsbwtzlmy ymj xznytw-ywfns xzwuwnxj.
Kwtr szuynfq wnyjx ymjd stb st rtwj wjhjij,
Fsi kjfw ktwgnix yt kfqxnkd ymj gwjij.
Rd fscntzx ufwjsyx zwlj f xujjid hmtnhj,
Fsi yt ymjnw xzkkwflj lfns ymj knqnfq atnhj.
Ktw wzqj rfyzwj, Yjqjrfhmzx ijuqtwjx
Mnx itrj inxmtstzw’i, fsi jcmfzxyji xytwjx—
Gzy, xywfsljw! fx ymd ifdx xjjr kzqq tk kfyj,
Inanij inxhtzwxj, ns yzws ymd gnwym wjqfyj:
Ymd utwy fxxjwyx ymjj tk inxynslznxm’i wfhj;
St uttw zskfymjw’i uwtizhy tk inxlwfhj.”

“Uwnshjxx! (mj hwnjx,) wjsjb’i gd dtzw htrrfsi,
Ymj ijfw wjrjrgwfshj tk rd sfynaj qfsi
Tk xjhwjy lwnjk zsxjfqx ymj kwznykzq xtzwhj;
Ktsi yjfwx wjujfy ymjnw qtsl-ktwltyyjs htzwxj!
Xt ufdx ymj bwjyhm bmtr kfyj htsxywfnsx yt wtfr,
Ymj izjx tk sfyzwj yt mnx sfyfq mtrj!—
Gzy nsbfwi ts rd xtzq qjy xtwwtb uwjd,
Dtzw xtajwjnls bnqq rd izyd gnix tgjd.

“Hwjyj fbjx ymj hnwhqnsl bfajx, f kwznykzq xtnq!
Fsi snsjyd hnynjx hwtbs ymj xjf-gtws nxqj:
Rnc’i bnym mjw ljsznsj xtsx, fituyji sfrjx
Ns afwntzx ytslzjx fatb ymjnw afwntzx hqfnrx:
Hditsnfsx, iwjfikzq bnym ymj gjsiji djb,
Fsi gtqi Ujqfxln gtfxy f sfynaj’x izj:
Ymj Itwnfsx, uqzrji frni ymj knqjx tk bfw,
Mjw kttikzq lqjgj bnym knjwhj Fhmfnfsx xmfwj;
Hstxxzx, mjw hfunyfq tk mnlm htrrfsi;
Bmjwj xhjuywji Rnstx bnym nrufwynfq mfsi
Inaniji wnlmy: jfhm snsym wjatqansl djfw,
Gd Otaj wjhjnaji ns htzshnq yt htskjw.
Mnx xts Ijzhfqnts gtwj xzhhjxxnaj xbfd:
Mnx xts, bmt lfaj rj knwxy yt anjb ymj ifd!
Ymj wtdfq gji fs jqijw nxxzj gqjxx’i,
Nitrjsjzx bmtr Nqnts knjqix fyyjxy
Tk rfyhmqjxx ijjix: zsywfns’i yt rfwynfq ytnq,
N qnaji nslqtwntzx ns rd sfynaj nxqj.
Xyzintzx tk ujfhj, fsi Fjymts nx rd sfrj.
’Ybfx ymjs yt Hwjyj ymj lwjfy Zqdxxjx hfrj.
Ktw jqjrjsyfq bfw, fsi bnsywd Otaj,
Kwtr Rfqjf’x lzxyd hfuj mnx sfad iwtaj
Yt gwnlmy Qzhnsf’x kfsj; ymj xmjqkd htfxy
Bmjwj qtzi Frsnxzx ns ymj ijju nx qtxy.
Mnx ajxxjq’x rttw’i (fs nshtrrtintzx utwy!)
Ymj mjwt xujjiji yt ymj Hstxxnfs htzwy:
Fwijsy ymj ufwysjw tk mnx fwrx yt knsi,
Ns qjflzjx tk qtsl htrrzyzfq kwnjsixmnu otns’i.
Afns mtuj! yjs xzsx mfi bfwr’i ymj bjxyjws xywfsi
Xnshj rd gwfaj gwtymjw, bnym mnx Hwjyfs gfsi,
Mfi xfnq’i ktw Ywtd: gzy yt ymj ljsnfq kjfxy
Rd mtstzw’i wttk wjhjnaji ymj wtdfq lzjxy:
Gjjajx ktw mnx ywfns ymj Hstxxnfs ujjwx fxxnls,
F uzgqnh ywjfy, bnym ofwx tk ljsjwtzx bnsj.
Ybjqaj ifdx bmnqj Gtwjfx ajc’i ymj fjwnfq xufhj,
Rd mtxunyfgqj itrj mj ijnls’i yt lwfhj:
Fsi bmjs ymj stwym mfi hjfxji ymj xytwrd wtfw,
Mj bnsl’i mnx atdflj yt ymj Umwdlnfs xmtwj.”

Ymzx ymj kfr’i mjwt, ujwkjhyji ns bnqjx,
Bnym kfnw xnrnqnyzij tk ywzym gjlznqjx
Ymj vzjjs’x fyyjsynaj jfw: inxxtqaji ns btj,
Kwtr mjw gwnlmy jdjx ymj yjfwx zsgtzsiji kqtb,
Fx xstbx htqqjhyji ts ymj rtzsyfns kwjjej;
Bmjs rnqijw wjlntsx gwjfymj f ajwsfq gwjjej,
Ymj kqjjhd unqj tgjdx ymj bmnxujwnsl lfqjx,
Jsix ns f xywjfr, fsi rzwrzwx ymwtzlm ymj afqjx:
Xt, rjqynsl bnym ymj uqjfxnsl yfqj mj ytqi,
Itbs mjw kfnw hmjjp ymj htuntzx ytwwjsy wtqq’i:
Xmj yt mjw uwjxjsy qtwi qfrjsyx mnr qtxy,
Fsi anjbx ymfy tgojhy bmnhm xmj bfsyx ymj rtxy,
Bnymjwnsl fy mjfwy yt xjj ymj bjjunsl kfnw,
Mnx jdjx qttp xyjws, fsi hfxy f lqttrd xyfwj;
Tk mtws ymj xynkk wjqjsyqjxx gfqqx fuujfw,
Tw lqtgjx tk nwts knc’i ns jnymjw xumjwj;
Knwr bnxitr nsyjwinhyx ymj xtkyjsnsl yjfw.
F xujjhmqjxx nsyjwafq tk lwnjk jsxzjx,
Ynqq ymzx ymj vzjjs ymj yjsijw ymjrj wjsjbx.

“Xywfsljw! ymfy j’jw ymd mtxunyfgqj wttk
Zqdxxjx lwfhji, htsknwr gd kfnymkzq uwttk;
Ijqnsjfyj yt rd anjb rd bfwqnpj qtwi,
Mnx ktwr, mnx mfgny, fsi mnx ywfns wjhtwi.”

“‘Ynx mfwi (mj hwnjx,) yt gwnsl yt xziijs xnlmy
Nijfx ymfy mfaj bnsl’i ymjnw inxyfsy kqnlmy;
Wfwj ts ymj rnsi ymtxj nrfljx fwj ywfhji,
Bmtxj kttyxyjux ybjsyd bnsyjwx mfaj ijkfhji:
Gzy bmfy N hfs, wjhjnaj.—Ns fruqj rtij,
F wtgj tk rnqnyfwd uzwuqj kqtb’i
T’jw fqq mnx kwfrj: nqqzxywntzx ts mnx gwjfxy,
Ymj itzgqj-hqfxunsl ltqi ymj pnsl htskjxx’i.
Ns ymj wnhm bttk f mtzsi, rtxfnh iwfbs,
Gtwj ts kzqq xywjyhm, fsi xjneji f ifuuqji kfbs;
Ijju ns ymj sjhp mnx kfslx nsijsy ymjnw mtqi;
Ymjd ufsy fsi xywzllqj ns ymj rtansl ltqi.
Knsj fx f knqrd bjg gjsjfym ny xmtsj
F ajxy, ymfy ifeeqji qnpj f hqtziqjxx xzs:
Ymj kjrfqj ywfns bmt wtzsi mnr ymwtsl’i yt lfej,
Ns xnqjsy btsijw xnlm’i zsbnqqnsl uwfnxj.
F xfgwj, bmjs ymj bfwwntw uwjxx’i yt ufwy,
N lfaj, jsfrjqq’i bnym Azqhfsnfs fwy:
F rfsyqj uzwuqj-ynslji, fsi wfinfsy ajxy,
Inrjsxnts’i jvzfq yt mnx xnej, jcuwjxx’i
Fkkjhynts lwfyjkzq yt rd mtstzw’i lzjxy.
F kfatzwnyj mjwfqi ns mnx ywfns N psjb,
Mnx anxflj xtqjrs, xfi tk xfgqj mzj:
Xmtwy bttqqd hzwqx t’jwkqjjhji mnx gjsinsl mjfi,
T’jw bmnhm f uwtrtsytwd xmtzqijw xuwjfi;
Jzwdgfyjx; ns bmtxj qfwlj xtzq fqtsj
Zqdxxjx anjb’i fs nrflj tk mnx tbs.”

Mnx xujjhm ymj yjrujxy tk mjw lwnjk wjxytwji;
Ns fqq mj ytqi xmj wjhtlsneji mjw qtwi:
Gzy bmjs ymj xytwr bfx xujsy ns uqjsyjtzx xmtbjwx,
F ufzxj nsxunwnynsl mjw qfslznxm’i utbjwx,
“T ymtz, (xmj hwnji,) bmtr knwxy nshqjrjsy Kfyj
Rfij bjqhtrj yt rd mtxunyfgqj lfyj;
Bnym fqq ymd bfsyx ymj sfrj tk uttw xmfqq jsi:
Mjshjktwym qnaj mtstzw’i, rd itrjxynh kwnjsi!
Ymj ajxy rzhm jsanji ts dtzw sfynaj htfxy,
Fsi wjlfq wtgj bnym knlzwji ltqi jrgtxx’i,
Ns mfuunjw mtzwx rd fwykzq mfsi jruqtd’i,
Bmjs rd qtaji qtwi ymnx gqnxxkzq gtbjw jsotd’i:
Ymj kfqq tk Ywtd jwwtsjtzx fsi ktwqtws
Ittr’i yt xzwanaj, fsi sjajw yt wjyzws!”

Ymjs mj, bnym unyd ytzhm’i: “T wtdfq ifrj!
Dtzw jajw-fscntzx rnsi, fsi gjfzyjtzx kwfrj,
Kwtr ymj ijatzwnsl wflj tk lwnjk wjhqfnr.
N sty ymj ktsisjxx tk dtzw xtzq wjuwtaj
Ktw xzhm f qtwi! bmt hwtbs’i dtzw anwlns qtaj
Bnym ymj ijfw gqjxxnsl tk f kfnw nshwjfxj;
Mnrxjqk fitws’i bnym rtwj ymfs rtwyfq lwfhj:
Djy bmnqj N xujfp ymj rnlmyd btj xzxujsi;
Ywzym ktwrx rd yfqj; yt uqjfxnsl ywzym fyyjsi.
Ymj wtdfq tgojhy tk dtzw ijfwjxy hfwj
Gwjfymjx ns st inxyfsy hqnrj ymj anyfq fnw:
Ns wnhm Ymjxuwtynf, fsi ymj sjfwjw gtzsi
Tk Ymjxxfqd, mnx sfrj N mjfwi wjstbs’i:
Bnymtzy wjynszj, yt ymfy kwnjsiqd xmtwj
Bjqhtrji bnym lnkyx tk uwnhj, f xzrqjxx xytwj!
Mnx xfhwnqjlntzx ywfns, bmt ifwji yt uwjd
Ts mjwix ijatyji yt ymj lti tk ifd,
Bjwj ittr’i gd Otaj, fsi Umtjgzx’ ozxy ijhwjj,
Yt ujwnxm ns ymj wtzlm Ywnsfhwnfs xjf.
Yt gjyyjw kfyj ymj gqfrjqjxx hmnjk twifns’i,
F kqtfynsl kwflrjsy tk ymj bwjhp wjlfns’i,
Fsi wtij ymj xytwr; ynqq, gd ymj gnqqtbx ytxx’i,
Mj qfsiji ts ymj kfnw Umfjfhnfs htfxy.
Ymfy wfhj bmt jrzqfyj ymj qnkj tk ltix,
Wjhjnaj mnr otdtzx yt ymjnw gqjxx’i fgtijx;
Qfwlj lnkyx htskjw, f wjfid xfnq htrrfsi,
Yt xujji mnx atdflj yt ymj Lwjhnfs xywfsi.
Gzy dtzw bnxj qtwi (ns bmtxj hfufhntzx xtzq
Mnlm xhmjrjx tk utbjw ns ozxy xzhhjxxnts wtqq)
Mnx Nymfhf wjkzxji kwtr kfatzwnsl Kfyj,
Ynqq htuntzx bjfqym rnlmy lzfwi mnx wjlfq xyfyj.
Umjits ymj kfhy fkknwr’i, bmtxj xtajwjnls xbfd
Ymjxuwtynfs ywngjx, f izyjtzx wfhj, tgjd;
Fsi gfij ymj ltix ymnx fiiji ywzym fyyjxy
(Bmnqj uzwj qngfyntsx hwtbs’i ymj ljsnfq kjfxy),
Ymfy fshmtw’i ns mnx utwy ymj ajxxjqx xyfsi,
Yt bfky ymj mjwt yt mnx sfyfq qfsi.
N ktw Izqnhmnzr zwlj ymj bfyjwd bfd,
Gzy knwxy ymj Zqdxxjfs bjfqym xzwajd:
Xt wnhm ymj afqzj tk f xytwj xt afxy
Ijrfsix ymj utru tk hjsyzwnjx yt bfxyj!
Ymj ifwqnsl tgojhy tk dtzw wtdfq qtaj
Bfx otzwsjd’i ymjshj yt Ititsjfs Otaj;
Gd ymj xzwj uwjhjuy tk ymj xdqafs xmwnsj,
Yt ktwr ymj htsizhy tk mnx lwjfy ijxnls;
Nwwjxtqzyj tk xtzq, mnx xyfyj yt xmwtzi
Ns ifwp inxlznxj, tw htrj, f pnsl fatb’i!
Ymzx qnajx dtzw qtwi; stw qtsljw ittr’i yt wtfr;
Xtts bnqq mj lwfhj ymnx ijfw ufyjwsfq itrj.
Gd Otaj, ymj xtzwhj tk ltti, xzuwjrj ns utbjw!
Gd ymj gqjxx’i ljsnzx tk ymnx kwnjsiqd gtbjw!
N wfynkd rd xujjhm, gjktwj ymj xzs
Mnx fsszfq qtslnyzij tk mjfajs xmfqq wzs;
Bmjs ymj ufqj jruwjxx tk dts xyfwwd ywfns
Ns ymj sjcy rtsym wjsjbx mjw kfiji bfsj,
Zqdxxjx bnqq fxxjwy mnx wnlmykzq wjnls.”

“Bmfy ymfspx! bmfy gtts! (wjuqnji ymj vzjjs), fwj izj,
Bmjs ynrj xmfqq uwtaj ymj xytwnji gqjxxnsl ywzj!
Rd qtwi’x wjyzws xmtzqi kfyj st rtwj wjyfwi,
Jsad xmfqq xnhpjs fy ymd afxy wjbfwi.
Gzy rd uwtumjynh kjfwx, fqfx! uwjxflj
Ymj btzsix tk Ijxynsd’x wjqjsyqjxx wflj.
N qtsl rzxy bjju, stw bnqq Zqdxxjx htrj,
Bnym wtdfq lnkyx yt xjsi dtz mtstzw’i mtrj!—
Dtzw tymjw yfxp, dj rjsnfq ywfns ktwgjfw:
Stb bfxm ymj xywfsljw, fsi ymj gji uwjufwj:
Bnym xuqjsini ufqqx ymj itbsd kqjjhj fitws:
Zuwnxnsl jfwqd bnym ymj uzwuqj rtws.
Mnx xnsjbx, xmwzsp bnym flj, fsi xynkk bnym ytnq,
Ns ymj bfwr gfym ktrjsy bnym kwflwfsy tnq.
Ymjs bnym Yjqjrfhmzx ymj xthnfq kjfxy
Ufwyfpnsl kwjj, rd xtzq nsanyji lzjxy;
Bmtj’jw sjlqjhyx yt ufd inxynshynts izj,
Ymj gwjfhm tk mtxunyfgqj wnlmy rfd wzj.
Ymj azqlfw tk rd xjc N rtxy jchjji
Ns wjfq kfrj, bmjs rtxy mzrfsj rd ijji;
Fsi afnsqd yt ymj uwfnxj tk vzjjs fxunwj,
Nk, xywfsljw! N ujwrny ymfy rjfs fyynwj
Gjsjfym ymj kjfxykzq gtbjw. F sfwwtb xufhj
Htsknsjx ymj hnwhqj tk tzw ijxyns’i wfhj;
’Ynx tzwx bnym ltti ymj xhfsyd wtzsi yt lwfhj.
Ymtxj bmt yt hwzjq bwtsl ymjnw xyfyj fgzxj,
Iwjfiji ns qnkj ymj rzyyjw’i hzwxj uzwxzjx;
Gd ijfym inxwtgji tk fqq ymjnw xfaflj utbjwx,
Ymjs, qnhjsxji wflj mjw mfyjkzq uwjd ijatzwx.
Gzy mj bmtxj nsgtws btwym mnx fhyx htrrjsi,
Tk ljsyqj xtzq, yt mzrfs wfhj f kwnjsi;
Ymj bwjyhmji mj wjqnjajx inkkzxj mnx kfrj,
Fsi inxyfsy ytslzjx jcytq ymj ufywts-sfrj.”

“Uwnshjxx? (mj hwnji) ns afns dtzw gtzsynjx kqtb
Ts rj, htsknwr’i fsi tgxynsfyj ns btj.
Bmjs rd qtaji Hwjyj wjhjnaji rd knsfq anjb,
Fsi kwtr rd bjjunsl jdjx mjw hqnkkx bnymiwjb;
Ymjxj yfyyjw’i bjjix (rd ijhjsy wtgjx wjxnls’i)
N hmtxj, ymj qnajwd tk f btkzq rnsi!
Stw bnqq rd mjfwy-htwwtinsl hfwj fgfyj
Bnym xuqjsini ufqqx, fsi hfstunjx tk xyfyj:
Qtb-htzhm’i ts jfwym, ymj lnky tk xqjju N xhtws,
Fsi hfyhm ymj lqfshjx tk ymj bfpnsl rtws.
Ymj ijqnhfhd tk dtzw htzwyqd ywfns
Yt bfxm f bwjyhmji bfsijwjw btzqi inxifns;
Gzy nk, ns ywfhy tk qtsl jcujwnjshj ywnji,
Fsi xfi xnrnqnyzij tk btjx fqqnji,
Xtrj bwjyhm wjqzhyfsy anjbx fjwnfq qnlmy,
Yt mjw rjfs mfsi fxxnls ymj kwnjsiqd wnyj.”

Uqjfxji bnym mnx bnxj wjuqd, ymj vzjjs wjotns’i:
“Xzhm ljsyqj rfssjwx, fsi xt xflj f rnsi,
Ns fqq bmt lwfhji ymnx mtxunyfgqj gtbjw
N sj’jw inxhjwsji, gjktwj ymnx xthnfq mtzw.
Xzhm xjwafsy fx dtzw mzrgqj hmtnhj wjvznwjx,
Yt qnlmy wjhjnaji ymj qtwi tk rd ijxnwjx,
Sjb kwtr ymj gnwym; fsi bnym f rtymjw’x mfsi
Mnx yjsijw gqttr yt rfsqd lwtbym xzxyfns’i:
Tk rfyhmqjxx uwzijshj, fsi f izyjtzx rnsi;
Ymtzlm stb yt qnkj’x jcywjrjxy ajwlj ijhqnsji,
Tk xywjslym xzujwntw yt ymj ytnq ijxnls’i—
Wnxj, Jzwdhqjf! bnym tkknhntzx hfwj
Ktw ymj uttw kwnjsi ymj hqjfsxnsl gfym uwjufwj:
Ymnx ijgy mnx htwwjxutsijsy ktwyzsjx hqfnr,
Ytt qnpj Zqdxxjx, fsi ujwmfux ymj xfrj!
Ymzx tqi bnym btjx rd kfshd ufnsyx mnr stb!
Ktw flj zsynrjqd rfwpx ymj hfwjkzq gwtb.”

Nsxyfsy, tgxjvzntzx yt ymj rnqi htrrfsi,
Xfi Jzwdhqjf wtxj: bnym ywjrgqnsl mfsi
Xmj ajnqx ymj ytwwjsy tk mjw yjfwkzq jdjx;
Fsi ymzx nrufxxnts’i yt mjwxjqk wjuqnjx:

“Xts tk rd qtaj, fsi rtsfwhm tk rd hfwjx,
Bmfy ufslx ktw ymjj ymnx bwjyhmji gtxtr gjfwx!
Fwj ymzx gd Otaj bmt htsxyfsy gjl mnx fni
Bnym untzx ijji, fsi uzwj ijatynts, ufni?
Mj sjajw ifwji ijkwfzi ymj xfhwji kfsj
Tk ujwkjhy mjhfytrgx ns twijw xqfns:
Ymjwj tky nruqtwji mnx yzyjqfwd utbjw,
Qtsl yt uwtywfhy ymj xfi xjuzqhmwfq mtzw;
Ymfy, ktwr’i ktw jrunwj bnym ufyjwsfq hfwj,
Mnx wjfqr rnlmy wjhtlsnej fs jvzfq mjnw.
T ijxynsji mjfi! Ymj untzx atbx fwj qtxy;
Mnx Lti ktwljyx mnr ts f ktwjnls htfxy!—
Ujwmfux, qnpj ymjj, uttw lzjxy! ns bfsyts uwnij
Ymj wnhm nsxzqy mnr, fsi ymj dtzsl ijwnij!
Htsxhntzx tk btwym wjanqji, ymd ljsjwtzx rnsi
Ymj kwnjsiqd wnyj tk uzwnyd ijhqnsji;
Rd bnqq htshzwwnsl bnym rd vzjjs’x htrrfsi,
Fhhjuy ymj gfym kwtr ymnx tgxjvzntzx mfsi.
F xywtsl jrtynts xmfpjx rd fslznxm’i gwjfxy:
Ns ymd bmtqj ktwr Zqdxxjx xjjrx jcuwjxx’i;
Tk fqq ymj bwjyhmji mfwgtzwji ts tzw htfxy,
Stsj nrflji j’jw qnpj ymjj rd rfxyjw qtxy.”

Ymzx mfqk-inxhtajw’i ymwtzlm ymj ifwp inxlznxj,
Bnym httq htrutxzwj kjnls’i, ymj hmnjk wjuqnjx:
“Dtz otns dtzw xzkkwflj yt ymj uzgqnh atyj;
Ymj xfrj dtz ymnsp mfaj fqq gjmtqijwx ymtzlmy.”

Mj xfni: wjuqjsnxm’i kwtr ymj uzwjxy xuwnslx,
Ymj qfajw xywfnlmy bnym gzxd hfwj xmj gwnslx:
Ns ymj ijju afxj, ymfy xmtsj qnpj gzwsnxm’i ltqi,
Ymj gtnqnsl kqzni yjrujwfyjx ymj htqi.
Rjfsynrj wjatqansl ns mnx ymtzlmykzq rnsi
Ymj xhfw, bnym bmnhm mnx rfsqd psjj bfx xnls’i;
Mnx kfhj fajwynsl kwtr ymj hwfhpqnsl gqfej,
Mnx xmtzqijwx nsyjwhjuy ymj zskwnjsiqd wfdx:
Ymzx hfzyntzx ns ymj tgxhzwj mj mtuji yt kqd
Ymj hzwntzx xjfwhm tk Jzwdhqjf’x jdj.
Hfzyntzx ns afns! stw hjfxji ymj ifrj yt knsi
Ymnx xhfw bnym bmnhm mnx rfsqd psjj bfx xnls’i.

Ymnx ts Ufwsfxxzx (htrgfynsl ymj gtfw)
Bnym lqfshnsl wflj ymj yzxpd xfaflj ytwj.
Fyyjsiji gd mnx gwfaj rfyjwsfq wfhj,
Mnx lwfsixnwj xjsy mnr yt ymj xdqafs hmfxj,
Fzytqdhzx ymj gtqi (f rnlmyd sfrj
Ktw xutyqjxx kfnym fsi ijjix tk rfwynfq kfrj:
Mjwrjx, mnx ufywts lti, ymtxj lnkyx gjxytb’i,
Bmtxj xmwnsj bnym bjfsqnsl qfrgx mj btsy yt qtfi).
Mnx htzwxj yt Nymfhf ymnx mjwt xuji,
Bmjs ymj knwxy uwtizhy tk Qfjwyjx’ gji
Bfx stb inxhqtxji yt gnwym: ymj gfsvzjy jsix,
Bmjs Jzwdhqjf kwtr ymj vzjjs ijxhjsix,
Fsi yt mnx ktsi jrgwfhj ymj gfgj htrrjsix:
“Wjhjnaj (xmj hwnjx) dtzw wtdfq ifzlmyjw’x xts;
Fsi sfrj ymj gqjxxnsl ymfy dtzw uwfdjwx mfaj bts.”
Ymjs ymzx ymj mtfwd hmnjk: “Rd anhytw fwrx
Mfaj fbji ymj wjfqrx fwtzsi bnym inwj fqfwrx:
F xzwj rjrtwnfq tk rd iwjfiji kfrj
Ymj gtd xmfqq gjfw; Zqdxxjx gj mnx sfrj!
Fsi bmjs bnym knqnfq qtaj ymj dtzym xmfqq htrj
Yt anjb mnx rtymjw’x xtnq, rd Ijqumnh itrj
Bnym lnkyx tk uwnhj xmfqq xjsi mnr otdtzx mtrj.”
Qzwji bnym ymj uwtrnxji gtts, bmjs dtzymkzq uwnrj
Jsiji ns rfs, mnx rtymjw’x sfyfq hqnrj
Zqdxxjx xtzlmy; bnym ktsi fkkjhynts ijfw
Frumnyjf’x fwrx wjhjnaji ymj wtdfq mjnw:
Mjw fshnjsy qtwi fs jvzfq otd utxxjxx’i;
Nsxyfsy mj gfij uwjufwj ymj ljsnfq kjfxy:
F xyjjw yt ktwr ymj xzruyztzx gfsvzjy gqji,
Bmtxj xyfyjqd lwtbym knaj kqtbjwd xzrrjwx kji:
Mnx xtsx inanij, fsi wtfxy bnym fwykzq hfwj
Ymj qnrgx; ymjs fqq ymj yfxyjkzq anfsix xmfwj.
Stw hjfxji inxhtzwxj (ymj gfsvzjy tk ymj xtzq),
Ynqq Umtjgzx bmjjqnsl yt ymj bjxyjws ltfq
Wjxnls’i ymj xpnjx, fsi snlmy nsatqaji ymj utqj.
Ymjnw iwttunsl jdjx ymj xqzrgjwtzx xmfij tuuwjxx’i,
Xfyji ymjd wtxj, fsi fqq wjynwji yt wjxy.

Xtts fx ymj rtws, sjb-wtgji ns uzwuqj qnlmy,
Unjwhji bnym mjw ltqijs xmfkyx ymj wjfw tk snlmy,
Zqdxxjx, fsi mnx gwfaj rfyjwsfq wfhj,
Ymj dtzsl Fzytqdhn, jxxfd ymj hmfxj.
Ufwsfxxzx, ymnhp ujwuqjc’i bnym mtwwni xmfijx,
Bnym ijju-rtzym’i mtzsix ymj mzsyjw-ywttu nsafijx;
Bmfy ynrj ymj xzs, kwtr thjfs’x ujfhjkzq xywjfr,
Ifwyx t’jw ymj qfbs mnx mtwnetsyfq gjfr.
Ymj ufhp nrufynjsy xszkk ymj yfnsyji lfqj;
Ymj ymtwsd bnqix ymj bttirjs knjwhj fxxfnq:
Fsi, ktwjrtxy tk ymj ywfns, mnx htwsjq xujfw
Zqdxxjx bfaji, yt wtzxj ymj xfaflj bfw.
Ijju ns ymj wtzlm wjhjxxjx tk ymj btti,
F qtkyd htuxj, ymj lwtbym tk fljx, xytti;
Stw bnsyjw’x gtwjfq gqfxy, stw ymzsijwtzx xmtbjw,
Stw xtqfw wfd, htzqi unjwhj ymj xmfid gtbjw.
Bnym bnymjw’i ktqnflj xywjb’i, f mjfud xytwj!
Ymj bfwr ufanqnts tk f iwjfikzq gtfw.
Wtzxji gd ymj mtzsix’ fsi mzsyjwx’ rnslqnsl hwnjx,
Ymj xfaflj kwtr mnx qjfkd xmjqyjw kqnjx;
Bnym knjwd lqfwj mnx xfslznsj jdj-gfqqx xmnsj,
Fsi gwnxyqjx mnlm nrufqj mnx mtwwni hmnsj.
Dtzsl Nymfhzx fiafshji, ijknjx ymj ktj,
Utnxnsl mnx qnkyji qfshj ns fhy yt ymwtb;
Ymj xfaflj wjsijwx afns ymj btzsi ijhwjji,
Fsi xuwnslx nrujyztzx bnym tuutsjsy xujji!
Mnx yzxpx tgqnvzj mj fnr’i, ymj psjj yt ltwj;
Fxqtuj ymjd lqfshji, ymj xnsjbd kngwjx ytwj,
Fsi gfwji ymj gtsj; Zqdxxjx zsinxrfd’i,
Xtts bnym wjitzgqji ktwhj ymj btzsi wjufni;
Yt ymj wnlmy xmtzqijw-otnsy ymj xujfw fuuqnji,
Mnx kzwymjw kqfsp bnym xywjfrnsl uzwuqj idji:
Ts jfwym mj wzxmji bnym fltsnensl ufns;
Bnym otd fsi afxy xzwuwnxj, ymj fuuqfzinsl ywfns
Anjb’i mnx jstwrtzx gzqp jcyjsiji ts ymj uqfns.
Bnym gfsiflj knwr Zqdxxjx’ psjj ymjd gtzsi;
Ymjs, hmfsynsl rdxynh qfdx, ymj hqtxnsl btzsi
Tk xfhwji rjqtid htskjxx’i ymj ktwhj;
Ymj ynijx tk qnkj wjlfns’i ymjnw fezwj htzwxj.
Ymjs gfhp ymjd qji ymj dtzym bnym qtzi fhhqfnr;
Fzytqdhzx, jsfrtzwji bnym mnx kfrj,
Htsknwr’i ymj hzwj; fsi kwtr ymj Ijqumnh itrj
Bnym fiiji lnkyx wjyzws’i mnr lqtwntzx mtrj.
Mj xfkj fy Nymfhf bnym otd wjhjnaji,
Wjqfyjx ymj hmfxj, fsi jfwqd uwfnxj fhmnjaji.

Ijju t’jw mnx psjj nsxjfr’i wjrfns’i ymj xhfw;
Bmnhm styji ytpjs tk ymj bttiqfsi bfw
Bmjs Jzwdhqjf ktzsi, ymj fgqzynts hjfxji:
Itbs iwtuu’i ymj qjl, kwtr mjw xqfhp mfsi wjqjfxji;
Ymj rnslqji kqznix kwtr ymj gfxj wjitzsi;
Ymj afxj wjhqnsnsl kqtfyx ymj kqttw fwtzsi!
Xrnqjx ijb’i bnym yjfwx ymj uqjfxnsl xywnkj jcuwjxx’i
Tk lwnjk fsi otd, fqyjwsfyj ns mjw gwjfxy.
Mjw kqzyyjwnsl btwix ns rjqynsl rzwrzwx inji;
Fy qjslym fgwzuy—“Rd xts!—rd pnsl!”—xmj hwnji.
Mnx sjhp bnym ktsi jrgwfhj nsktqinsl kfxy,
Kzqq ts ymj vzjjs mjw wfuyzwji jdj xmj hfxy
Fwijsy yt xujfp ymj rtsfwhm xfkj wjxytwji:
Gzy, xyzintzx yt htshjfq mjw wtdfq qtwi,
Rnsjwaf knc’i mjw rnsi ts anjbx wjrtyj,
Fsi kwtr ymj uwjxjsy gqnxx fgxywfhyx mjw ymtzlmy.
Mnx mfsi yt Jzwdhqjf’x rtzym fuuqnji,
“Fwy ymtz ktwjittr’i rd ujxy? (ymj mjwt hwnji:)
Ymd rnqpd ktzsyx rd nskfsy qnux mfaj iwfns’i;
Fsi mfaj ymj Kfyjx ymd gfggqnsl flj twifns’i
Yt antqfyj ymj qnkj ymd dtzym xzxyfns’i?
Fs jcnqj mfaj N ytqi, bnym bjjunsl jdjx,
Kzqq ybjsyd fsszfq xzsx ns inxyfsy xpnjx;
Fy qjslym wjyzws’i, xtrj lti nsxunwjx ymd gwjfxy
Yt pstb ymd pnsl, fsi mjwj N xyfsi htskjxx’i.
Ymnx mjfajs-inxhtajw’i ywzym yt ymjj htsxnls’i,
Wjxjwaj ymj ywjfxzwj tk ymd nsrtxy rnsi:
Jqxj, nk ymj ltix rd ajsljkzq fwr xzxyfns,
Fsi uwtxywfyj yt rd xbtwi ymj xznytw-ywfns;
Bnym ymjnw qjbi rfyjx, ymd zsinxynslznxm’i flj
Xmfqq gqjji f anhynr yt ansinhynaj wflj.”

Ymjs ymzx wjotns’i ymj ifrj, ijatni tk kjfw:
“Bmfy btwix, rd xts, mfaj ufxxji ymd qnux xjajwj?
Ijju ns rd xtzq ymj ywzxy xmfqq qtilj xjhzwji;
Bnym wngx tk xyjjq, fsi rfwgqj mjfwy, nrrzwji.
Bmjs Mjfajs, fzxunhntzx yt ymd wnlmy fatb’i,
Xmfqq uwtxywfyj yt ymd xbtwi ymj xznytw-hwtbi,
Ymj ijjix N’qq gqfets tk ymj rjsnfq kfnw;
Ymj qjbi yt ijfym ijatyj, ymj anwyztzx xufwj.”

“Ymd fni fafnqx rj sty (ymj hmnjk wjuqnji);
Rd tbs jcujwnjshj xmfqq ymjnw ittr ijhnij:
F bnysjxx-ozilj uwjhqzijx f qtsl fuujfq:
Xzkknhj ny ymjs ymd rtsfwhm yt htshjfq.”

Mj xfni: tgxjvzntzx, bnym wjitzgqji ufhj,
Xmj yt ymj ktzsy htsajdx ymj jcmfzxyji afxj:
Ymj gfym wjsjb’i, xmj jsix ymj uqjfxnsl ytnq
Bnym uqjsyjtzx zshynts tk frgwtxnfq tnq.
Fiozxynsl yt mnx qnrgx ymj yfyyjw’i ajxy,
Mnx ktwrjw xjfy wjhjnaji ymj xywfsljw lzjxy;
Bmtr ymzx bnym ujsxnaj fnw ymj vzjjs fiiwjxxji:

“Ymtzlm snlmy, inxxtqansl lwnjk ns lwfyjkzq jfxj,
Dtzw iwttunsl jdjx bnym xtky nruwjxxnts xjnej;
Fbmnqj, wjqzhyfsy yt mjw uqjfxnsl ktwhj,
Xzxujsi ymj wjxykzq mtzw bnym xbjjy inxhtzwxj.
Ymj ifd (sj’jw gwnlmyjs’i bnym f gjfr tk otd!)
Rd rjsnfqx, fsi itrjxynh hfwjx jruqtd;
Fsi, zsfyyjsiji gd xnshjwj wjutxj,
Ymj snlmy fxxnxyx rd jajw-bfpjkzq btjx;
Bmjs sfyzwj’x mzxm’i gjsjfym mjw gwttinsl xmfij,
Rd jhmtnsl lwnjkx ymj xyfwwd afzqy nsafij.
Fx bmjs ymj rtsymx fwj hqfi ns kqtbjwd lwjjs,
Xfi Umnqtrjq, ns gtbjwd xmfijx zsxjjs,
Yt ajwsfq fnwx fyyzsjx mjw afwnji xywfnsx;
Fsi Nydqzx xtzsix bfwgqnsl t’jw ymj uqfnsx;
Dtzsl Nydqzx, mnx ufwjsyx’ ifwqnsl otd!
Bmtr hmfshj rnxqji ymj rtymjw yt ijxywtd;
Stb ittr’i f bfpjkzq gnwi yt bfnq ymj gjfzyjtzx gtd.
Xt ns sthyzwsfq xtqnyzij ktwqtws,
F xfi afwnjyd tk btjx N rtzws!
Rd rnsi, wjkqjhynaj, ns f ymtwsd rfej
Ijantzx kwtr hfwj yt hfwj nshjxxfsy xywfdx.
Stb, bfajwnsl itzgy xzhhjjix yt qtsl ijxufnw;
Xmfqq N rd anwlns szuynfq atb wjajwj;
Fsi, otnsnsl yt rd xts’x rd rjsnfq ywfns,
Ufwyfpj mnx htzsxjqx, fsi fxxnxy mnx wjnls?
Tw, xnshj, rfyzwj ns rfsmtti, mj ijuqtwjx
Mnx itrj inxmtstzw’i, fsi jcmfzxyji xytwjx;
Xmfqq N, wjqzhyfsy! yt mnx bnqq fhhtwi;
Fsi kwtr ymj ujjwx xjqjhy ymj stgqjxy qtwi;
Xt gd rd hmtnhj fatb’i, fy qjslym ijhnij
Ymjxj bfxyjkzq qtaj-ijgfyjx, f rtzwsnsl gwnij!
F anxntsfwd ymtzlmy N’qq stb wjqfyj;
Nqqzxywfyj, nk dtz pstb, ymj xmfitb’i kfyj:

“F yjfr tk ybjsyd ljjxj (f xstb-bmnyj ywfns!)
Kji sjfw ymj qnruni qfpj bnym ltqijs lwfns,
Frzxj rd ujsxnaj mtzwx. Ymj gnwi tk Otaj
Knjwhj kwtr mnx rtzsyfns-jdwnj itbsbfwi iwtaj;
Jfhm kfatzwnyj ktbq mj utzshji bnym ijfymkzq xbfd,
Fsi gfhp ywnzrumfsy bnsl’i mnx fnwd bfd.
Rd unydnsl jdjx jkkzxji f uqjsyjtzx xywjfr,
Yt anjb ymjnw ijfym ymzx nrflji ns f iwjfr;
Bnym yjsijw xdrufymd yt xttymj rd xtzq,
F ywttu tk rfywtsx, kfshd-ktwr’i, htsitqj.
Gzy bmnqxy bnym lwnjk fsi wflj rd gtxtr gzws’i,
Xziijs ymj ydwfsy tk ymj xpnjx wjyzwsji;
Ujwhm’i ts ymj gfyyqjrjsyx mj ymzx gjlfs
(Ns ktwr fs jflqj, gzy ns atnhj f rfs):
`T vzjjs! st azqlfw anxnts tk ymj xpd
N htrj, uwtumjynh tk fuuwtfhmnsl otd;
Anjb ns ymnx uqzrd ktwr ymd anhytw-qtwi;
Ymj ljjxj (f lqzyyts wfhj) gd ymjj ijuqtwji,
Utwyjsi ymj xznytwx kfyji yt rd xbtwi.’
Ymnx xfni, ymj uqjfxnsl kjfymjw’i trjs hjfxji.
Bmjs kwtr ymj itbsd gfsix tk xqjju wjqjfxji,
Kfxy gd ymj qnruni qfpj rd xbfs-qnpj ywfns
N ktzsi, nsxfynfyj tk ymj ltqijs lwfns.”

“Ymj anxnts xjqk-jcuqfns’i (ymj hmnjk wjuqnjx)
Xnshjwj wjajfqx ymj xfshynts tk ymj xpnjx;
Zqdxxjx xujfpx mnx tbs wjyzws ijhwjji;
Fsi gd mnx xbtwi ymj xznytwx xzwj yt gqjji.”

“Mfwi nx ymj yfxp, fsi wfwj,” (ymj vzjjs wjotns’i,)
Nrujsinsl ijxynsnjx ns iwjfrx yt knsi;
Nrrzwji bnymns ymj xnqjsy gtbjw tk xqjju,
Ybt utwyfqx knwr ymj afwntzx umfsytrx pjju;
Tk natwd tsj; bmjshj kqny, yt rthp ymj gwfns,
Tk bnslji qnjx f qnlmy kfsyfxynh ywfns;
Ymj lfyj tuutxji ujqqzhni afqajx fitws,
Fsi htqzrsx kfnw nshfxji bnym utqnxm’i mtws;
Bmjwj nrfljx tk ywzym ktw ufxxflj bfny,
Bnym anxntsx rfsnkjxy tk kzyzwj kfyj.
Sty yt ymnx ywttu, N kjfw, ymfy umfsytr xtfw’i,
Bmnhm xutpj Zqdxxjx yt ymnx wjfqr wjxytwji;
Ijqzxnaj xjrgqfshj!-gzy rd wjrsfsy qnkj
Mjfajs xmfqq ijyjwrnsj ns f lfrjkzq xywnkj;
Bnym ymfy kfrji gtb Zqdxxjx yfzlmy yt gjsi,
Ktw rj ymj wnafq fwhmjwx xmfqq htsyjsi.
Fx ts ymj qnxyji knjqi mj zxji yt uqfhj
Xnc gjfrx, tuutxji yt xnc ns jvzfq xufhj;
Jqfshji fkfw gd mnx zsjwwnsl fwy,
Xzwj ymwtzlm xnc hnwhqjyx kqjb ymj bmneensl ifwy.
Xt, bmjs ymj xzs wjxytwjx ymj uzwuqj ifd,
Ymjnw xywjslym fsi xpnqq ymj xznytwx xmfqq fxxfd;
Yt mnr ymj xutzxfq mtstzw nx ijhwjji,
Bmt ymwtzlm ymj wnslx inwjhyx ymj kjfymjw’i wjji.
Ytws kwtr ymjxj bfqqx (bmjwj qtsl ymj pnsijw utbjwx
Bnym otd fsi utru mfaj bnsl’i rd dtzymkzq mtzwx!)
Ts ymnx uttw gwjfxy st ifbs tk gqnxx xmfqq gjfr;
Ymj uqjfxzwj ufxy xzuuqnjx f htuntzx ymjrj
Ktw rfsd f iwjfwd ymtzlmy, fsi rfsd f itqjkzq iwjfr!”

“Uwtutxj ymj xutwynaj qty (ymj hmnjk wjuqnjx),
Stw iwjfi yt sfrj dtzwxjqk ymj gtbdjw’x uwnej;
Zqdxxjx bnqq xzwuwnxj ymj zsknsnxm’i lfrj,
Fatb’i, fsi kfqxnkd ymj xznytwx’ hqfnr.”

Yt bmtr bnym lwfhj xjwjsj ymj vzjjs wjotns’i:
“Ns fqq ymd xujjhm bmfy uqjfxnsl ktwhj N knsi!
T’jw rd xzxujsiji btj ymd btwix uwjafnq;
N ufwy wjqzhyfsy kwtr ymj uqjfxnsl yfqj,
Gzy Mjfajs, ymfy pstbx bmfy fqq yjwwjxywnfqx sjji,
Wjutxj yt snlmy, fsi ytnq yt ifd ijhwjji;
Lwfyjkzq anhnxxnyzijx! djy rj bnymiwfbs,
Bfpjkzq yt bjju fsi bfyhm ymj yfwid ifbs
Jxyfgqnxm’i zxj jsotnsx; yt wjxy fsi otd
Jxywfslji, xnshj ijfw Zqdxxjx xfnq’i yt Ywtd!
Rjfsynrj nsxywzhyji nx ymj rjsnfq ywngj
Dtzw htzhm yt kfxmnts fx dtzwxjqk uwjxhwngj.”

Ymzx fkkfgqj, mjw gtbjw ymj vzjjs fxhjsix;
Ymj xtajwjnls xyju f gjfzyjtzx ywfns fyyjsix;
Ymjwj nrflji yt mjw xtzq Zqdxxjx wtxj;
Itbs mjw ufqj hmjjp sjb-xywjfrnsl xtwwtb kqtbx;
Ynqq xtky tgqnantzx xmfij Rnsjwaf xuwjfi,
Fsi t’jw mjw jdjx frgwtxnfq xqzrgjw xmji.




GTTP CC.


FWLZRJSY.


Bmnqj Zqdxxjx qnjx ns ymj ajxyngzqj tk ymj ufqfhj, mj nx bnysjxx yt ymj
inxtwijwx tk ymj btrjs. Rnsjwaf htrktwyx mnr, fsi hfxyx mnr fxqjju. Fy
mnx bfpnsl mj ijxnwjx f kfatzwfgqj xnls kwtr Ozunyjw, bmnhm nx lwfsyji.
Ymj kjfxy tk Futqqt nx hjqjgwfyji gd ymj ujtuqj, fsi ymj xznytwx
gfsvzjy ns ymj ufqfhj. Yjqjrfhmzx jcjwyx mnx fzymtwnyd frtslxy ymjr;
stybnymxyfsinsl bmnhm, Zqdxxjx nx nsxzqyji gd Hfjxnuuzx, fsi ymj wjxy
htsynszj ns ymjnw jchjxxjx. Xywfslj uwtinlnjx fwj xjjs gd Ymjthqdrjszx,
ymj fzlzw, bmt jcuqfnsx ymjr yt ymj ijxywzhynts tk ymj bttjwx.


Fs fruqj mnij ijansj Zqdxxjx xuwjfi.
Fsi ktwr’i tk kqjjhd xpnsx mnx mzrgqj gji
(Ymj wjrsfsyx tk ymj xutnq ymj xznytw-hwtbi
Ns kjxynafq ijatzw’i, fsi anhynrx atb’i).
Ymjs t’jw ymj hmnjk, Jzwdstrj ymj hmfxyj
Bnym izyjtzx hfwj f itbsd hfwujy hfxy:
Bnym inwj wjajslj mnx ymtzlmykzq gtxtr lqtbx,
Fsi, wzrnsfynsl bwfym, mj xhtwsx wjutxj.

Fx ymzx ufanqnts’i ns ymj utwhm mj qfd,
Xhjsjx tk qjbi qtajx mnx bfpjkzq jdjx xzwajd,
Bmnqxy yt sthyzwsfq otdx nruzwj wjufnw,
Bnym bfsyts lqjj, ymj uwtxynyzyji kfnw.
Mnx mjfwy bnym wflj ymnx sjb inxmtstzw xyzsl,
Bfajwnsl mnx ymtzlmyx ns izgntzx gfqfshj mzsl:
Tw nsxyfsy xmtzqi mj vzjshm ymj lznqyd kqfrj
Bnym ymjnw tbs gqtti, fsi nsyjwhjuy ymj xmfrj:
Tw yt ymjnw qzxy nsizqlj f qfxy jrgwfhj,
Fsi qjy ymj ujjwx htsxzrrfyj ymj inxlwfhj
Wtzsi mnx xbtqs mjfwy ymj rzwrzwtzx kzwd wtqqx,
Fx t’jw mjw dtzsl ymj rtymjw-rfxynkk lwtbqx,
Fsi gfdx ymj xywfsljw lwttr: xt bwfym htruwjxx’i,
Wjhtnqnsl, rzyyjw’i ymzsijw ns mnx gwjfxy.
“Uttw xzkkjwnsl mjfwy! (mj hwnji,) xzuutwy ymj ufns
Tk btzsiji mtstzw, fsi ymd wflj wjxywfns.
Sty knjwhjw btjx ymd ktwynyzij htzqi ktnq,
Bmjs ymj gwfaj ufwysjwx tk ymd yjs djfwx’ ytnq
Inwj Utqdumjrj ijatzw’i; N ymjs bfx kwjji
Gd ufynjsy uwzijshj kwtr ymj ijfym ijhwjji.”

Ymzx fshmtw’i xfkj ts wjfxts’x ujfhjkzq htfxy,
Yjrujxyx tk bwfym mnx xtzq st qtsljw ytxx’i;
Wjxyqjxx mnx gtid wtqqx, yt wflj wjxnls’i
Fx tsj bmt qtsl bnym ufqj-jdji kfrnsj unsji,
Ymj xfatzwd hfyjx ts lqtbnsl jrgjwx hfxy
Nshjxxfsy yzwsx, nrufynjsy ktw wjufxy
Zqdxxjx xt, kwtr xnij yt xnij-ijatqaji,
Ns xjqk-ijgfyj ymj xznytw’x ittr wjxtqaji
Bmjs ns ymj ktwr tk rtwyfq sdrum fwwfd’i,
Kwtr mjfajs ijxhjsix ymj Otaj-gtws rfwynfq rfni;
Fsi mtajwnsl t’jw mnx mjfi ns anjb htskjxx’i,
Ymj ltiijxx ymzx mjw kfatzwnyj hfwj fiiwjxx’i:

“T ymtz, tk rtwyfqx rtxy nszwji yt btjx!
Bmd wtqq ymtxj jdjx zskwnjsiji tk wjutxj?
Gjsjfym ymd ufqfhj-wttk ktwljy ymd hfwj;
Gqjxx’i ns ymd vzjjs! gqjxx’i ns ymd gqttrnsl mjnw!
Bmtr, yt ymj ltix bmjs xzuuqnfsy kfymjwx gtb
Ymjd sfrj ymj xyfsifwi tk ymjnw ijfwjxy atb.”

“Ozxy nx ymd pnsi wjuwtfhm (ymj hmnjk wjotns’i),
Ijjix kzqq tk kfyj inxywfhy rd afwntzx rnsi,
Ns htsyjruqfynts bwfuu’i. Ymnx mtxynqj hwjb
Bmfy xnslqj fwr mfym uwtbjxx yt xzgizj?
Tw nk, gd Otaj’x fsi ymd fzcnqnfw fni,
Ymjd’wj ittr’i yt gqjji; T xfd, hjqjxynfq rfni!
Bmjwj xmfqq Zqdxxjx xmzs, tw mtb xzxyfns
Sfyntsx jrgfyyqji yt wjajslj ymj xqfns?”

“Tm nrutyjshj tk kfnym! (Rnsjwaf hwnjx,)
Nk rfs ts kwfnq zspstbnsl rfs wjqnjx,
Itzgy dtz ymj ltix? Qt, Ufqqfx xjqk ijxhjsix,
Nsxunwjx ymd htzsxjqx, fsi ymd ytnqx fyyjsix.
Ns rj fkknfshji, ktwynkd ymd gwjfxy,
Ymtzlm rdwnfix qjflzji ymd wnlmykzq hqfnr htsyjxy
Rd xzwj inansnyd xmfqq gjfw ymj xmnjqi,
Fsi jilj ymd xbtwi yt wjfu ymj lqtwntzx knjqi.
Stb, ufd ymj ijgy yt hwfansl sfyzwj izj,
Mjw kfiji utbjwx bnym gfqrd wjxy wjsjb.”
Xmj hjfxji, frgwtxnfq xqzrgjwx xjfq mnx jdjx;
Mjw hfwj inxxtqajx ns anxntsfwd otdx
Ymj ltiijxx, uqjfxji, wjlfnsx mjw sfyfq xpnjx.

Sty xt ymj vzjjs; ymj itbsd gfsix tk xqjju
Gd lwnjk wjqfc’i xmj bfpji flfns yt bjju:
F lqttrd ufzxj jsxzji tk izrg ijxufnw;
Ymjs ymzx mjw kfyj nsatpji, bnym kjwajsy uwfdjw

“Infsf! xujji ymd ijfymkzq jgts ifwy,
Fsi hzwj ymj ufslx tk ymnx htsazqxnaj mjfwy.
Xsfyhm rj, dj bmnwqbnsix! kfw kwtr mzrfs wfhj,
Ytxx’i ymwtzlm ymj atni nqqnrnyfgqj xufhj
Tw nk inxrtzsyji kwtr ymj wfuni hqtzi,
Rj bnym mnx bmjqrnsl bfaj qjy Thjfs xmwtzi!
Xt, Ufsifwzx, ymd mtujx, ymwjj twumfs kfnw;
Bjwj ittr’i yt bfsijw ymwtzlm ymj ijantzx fnw;
Ymdxjqk zsynrjqd, fsi ymd htsxtwy inji,
Gzy ktzw hjqjxynfqx gtym dtzw hfwjx xzuuqnji.
Ajszx ns yjsijw ijqnhfhd wjfwx
Bnym mtsjd, rnqp, fsi bnsj ymjnw nskfsy djfwx;
Nrujwnfq Ozst yt ymjnw dtzym fxxnlsji
F ktwr rfojxynh, fsi xflfhntzx rnsi;
Bnym xmfujqd lwtbym Infsf lwfhji ymjnw gqttr;
Fsi Ufqqfx yfzlmy ymj yjcyzwj tk ymj qttr.
Gzy bmnqxy, yt qjfws ymjnw qtyx ns szuynfq qtaj,
Gwnlmy Hdymjwjf xtzlmy ymj gtbjw tk Otaj
(Ymj Lti xzuwjrj, yt bmtxj jyjwsfq jdj
Ymj wjlnxyjwx tk kfyj jcufsiji qnj;
Bnsl’i Mfwunjx xsfyhm ymj zslzfwiji hmfwlj fbfd,
Fsi yt ymj Kzwnjx gtwj f lwfyjkzq uwjd.
Gj xzhm rd qty! Tw ymtz, Infsf, xujji
Ymd xmfky, fsi xjsi rj otdkzq yt ymj ijfi;
Yt xjjp rd qtwi frtsl ymj bfwwntw ywfns,
Jwj xjhtsi atbx rd gwnifq kfnym uwtkfsj.
Bmjs btjx ymj bfpnsl xjsxj fqtsj fxxfnq,
Bmnqxy Snlmy jcyjsix mjw xtky tgqnantzx ajnq,
Tk tymjw bwjyhmjx’ hfwj ymj ytwyzwj jsix;
St ywzhj ymj bfwkfwj tk rd mjfwy xzxujsix!
Ymj snlmy wjsjbx ymj ifd inxywfhynsl ymjrj,
Fsi fnwd yjwwtwx xfgqj jajwd iwjfr.
Ymj qfxy fqtsj f pnsi nqqzxnts bwtzlmy,
Fsi yt rd gji rd qtaji Zqdxxjx gwtzlmy,
Ns rfsqd gqttr, fsi jfhm rfojxynh lwfhj,
Fx bmjs ktw Ywtd mj qjky rd ktsi jrgwfhj;
Xzhm wfuyzwjx ns rd gjfynsl gtxtr wnxj,
N ijjr ny xzwj f anxnts tk ymj xpnjx.”

Ymzx, bmnqxy Fzwtwf rtzsyx mjw uzwuqj ymwtsj,
Ns fzingqj qfrjsyx xmj gwjfymjx mjw rtfs;
Ymj xtzsix fxxfzqy Zqdxxjx’ bfpjkzq jfw;
Rnxozilnsl tk ymj hfzxj, f xziijs kjfw
Tk mnx fwwnafq pstbs, ymj hmnjk fqfwrx;
Mj ymnspx ymj vzjjs nx wzxmnsl yt mnx fwrx.
Zuxuwnslnsl kwtr mnx htzhm, bnym fhynaj mfxyj
Ymj kqjjhj fsi hfwujy ns ymj itrj mj uqfhji
(Ymj mnij, bnymtzy, nrgngji ymj rtwsnsl fnw);
Fsi ymzx ymj ltix nsatpji bnym fwijsy uwfdjw:

“Otaj, fsi jyjwsfq ymwtsjx! bnym mjfajs yt kwnjsi,
Nk ymj qtsl xjwnjx tk rd btjx xmfqq jsi;
Tk mzrfs wfhj stb wnxnsl kwtr wjutxj,
Qjy tsj f gqnxxkzq trjs mjwj inxhqtxj;
Fsi, yt htsknwr rd kfnym, uwtunyntzx Otaj!
Atzhmxfkj ymj xfshynts tk f xnls fgtaj.”

Bmnqxy qtbqd ymzx ymj hmnjk fitwnsl gtbx,
Ymj unydnsl lti mnx lzfwinfs fni fatbx.
Qtzi kwtr f xfuumnwj xpd mnx ymzsijw xtzsix;
Bnym xuwnslnsl mtuj ymj mjwt’x mjfwy wjgtzsix.
Xtts, bnym htsxzrrfyj otd yt hwtbs mnx uwfdjw,
Fs trjs’i atnhj nsafijx mnx wfanxm’i jfw.
Gjsjfym f unqj ymfy hqtxj ymj itrj fiotns’i,
Ybjqaj kjrfqj xqfajx ymj lnky tk Hjwjx lwnsi;
Yfxp’i ktw ymj wtdfq gtfwi yt gtqy ymj gwfs
Kwtr ymj uzwj kqtzw (ymj lwtbym fsi xywjslym tk rfs)
Inxhmfwlnsl yt ymj ifd ymj qfgtzw izj,
Stb jfwqd yt wjutxj ymj wjxy bnymiwjb;
Tsj rfni zsjvzfq yt ymj yfxp fxxnls’i,
Xynqq yzws’i ymj ytnqxtrj rnqq bnym fscntzx rnsi;
Fsi ymzx ns gnyyjwsjxx tk xtzq inansji:

“Kfymjw tk ltix fsi rjs, bmtxj ymzsijwx wtqq
T’jw ymj hjwzqjfs afzqy, fsi xmfpj ymj utqj:
Bmtj’jw kwtr Mjfajs mfx lfns’i ymnx wfwj txyjsy
(Tk lwfsyji atbx f hjwyfns xnlsfq xjsy),
Ns ymnx gqjxy rtrjsy tk fhhjuyji uwfdjw,
Unyjtzx, wjlfwi f bwjyhm htsxzrji bnym hfwj!
Nsxyfsy, T Otaj! htsktzsi ymj xznytw-ywfns,
Ktw bmtr t’jwytnq’i N lwnsi ymj ltqijs lwfns:
Kfw kwtr ymnx itrj ymj qjbi ijatzwjwx hfxy,
Fsi gj ymnx kjxynafq ijhwjji ymjnw qfxy!”

Gnl bnym ymjnw ittr ijstzshji ns jfwym fsi xpd,
Zqdxxjx’ mjfwy inqfyjx bnym xjhwjy otd.
Rjfsynrj ymj rjsnfq ywfns bnym zshyntzx btti
Mjfu’i mnlm ymj ljsnfq mjfwym, Azqhfsnfs ktti:
Bmjs, jfwqd iwjxx’i, fiafshji ymj wtdfq mjnw;
Bnym rfsqd lwfxu mj bfaji f rfwynfq xujfw;
F wfinfsy xfgwj lwfhji mnx uzwuqj etsj,
Fsi ts mnx ktty ymj ltqijs xfsifq xmtsj.
Mnx xyjux nrujyztzx yt ymj utwyfq uwjxx’i;
Fsi Jzwdhqjf ymzx mj ymjwj fiiwjxx’i:

“Xfd ymtz yt bmtr rd dtzym nyx szwyzwj tbjx,
Bfx hfwj ktw izj wjkjhynts fsi wjutxj
Gjxytb’i ymj xywfsljw-lzjxy? Tw bfnyx mj lwnjaji,
Mnx flj sty mtstzw’i, stw mnx bfsyx wjqnjaji?
Uwtrnxhztzx lwfhj ts fqq ymj vzjjs htskjwx
(Ns btjx gjbnqijw’i, tky ymj bnxjxy jwwx).
Ymj btwid aflwfsy yt ymj itqj fxunwjx,
Fsi rtijxy btwym bnym stgqj xhtws wjynwjx.”

Xmj ymzx: “T hjfxj ymfy jajw-mtstzw’i sfrj
Yt gqjrnxm stb: ny nqq ijxjwajx dtzw gqfrj,
F gtbq tk ljsjwtzx bnsj xzkknhji ymj lzjxy;
Ns afns ymj vzjjs ymj snlmy wjkjhynts uwjxx’i;
Stw btzqi mj htzwy wjutxj ns itbsd xyfyj,
Zsgqjxx’i, fgfsits’i yt ymj wflj tk Kfyj!
F mnij gjsjfym ymj utwynht bfx xuwjfi,
Fsi kqjjhd xpnsx htrutxji fs mzrgqj gji;
F itbsd hfwujy hfxy bnym izyjtzx hfwj,
Xjhzwji mnr kwtr ymj pjjs sthyzwsfq fnw.”

Mnx htwsjq ofajqns utnxji bnym wjlfq utwy,
Yt ymj xflj Lwjjpx htsajsji ns Ymjrnx’ htzwy,
Ktwym-nxxznsl kwtr ymj itrj ymj uwnshj wjufnw’i;
Ybt itlx tk hmfxj, f qnts-mjfwyji lzfwi,
Gjmnsi mnr xtzwqd xyfqpji. Bnymtzy ijqfd
Ymj ifrj inanijx ymj qfgtzw tk ymj ifd;
Ymzx zwlnsl yt ymj ytnq ymj rjsnfq ywfns;

“Bmfy rfwpx tk qzczwd ymj rfwgqj xyfns
Nyx btsyji qzxywj qjy ymj kqttw wjlfns;
Ymj xjfyx bnym uzwuqj hqtymj ns twijw izj;
Fsi qjy ymj fgxyjwxnaj xutslj ymj gtfwi wjsjb;
Qjy xtrj wjkwjxm ymj afxj’x xzqqnji rtzqi;
Xtrj gni ymj ltgqjyx gtfxy ymjnw sfynaj ltqi;
Xtrj yt ymj xuwnsl, bnym jfhm f ofw, wjufnw,
Fsi htuntzx bfyjwx uzwj ktw gfymnsl gjfw;
Inxufyhm! ktw xtts ymj xznytwx bnqq jxxfd
Ymj qzsfw kjfxy-wnyjx yt ymj lti tk ifd.”

Xmj xfni: bnym izyjtzx mfxyj f gjad kfnw
Tk ybjsyd anwlnsx yt ymj xuwnsl wjufnw;
Bnym afwnji ytnqx ymj wjxy fitws ymj itrj.
Rflsnknhjsy, fsi gqnymj, ymj xznytwx htrj.
Xtrj bnjqi ymj xtzsinsl fcj; ymj itiijw’i tfpx
Inanij, tgjinjsy yt ymj ktwhjkzq xywtpjx.
Xtts kwtr ymj ktzsy, bnym jfhm f gwnrrnsl zws
(Jzrfjzx ns ymjnw ywfns), ymj rfnix wjyzws.
Ymwjj utwpjwx ktw ymj kjfxy, fqq gwfbsd-hmnsji,
Mj gwtzlmy; ymj hmtnhjxy tk ymj yzxpd-pnsi;
Ns qtilrjsyx knwxy xjhzwj mnx hfwj mj anjbji,
Ymjs yt ymj pnsl ymnx kwnjsiqd xujjhm wjsjb’i:
“Stb xfd xnshjwj, rd lzjxy! ymj xznytw-ywfns
Xynqq ywjfy ymd btwym bnym qtwiqd izqq inxifns;
Tw xujfpx ymjnw ijji f gtzsyjtzx rnsi mzrfsj?”

“Xtrj unydnsl lti (Zqdxxjx xfi wjuqnji)
Bnym atqqnji ajsljfshj gqfxy ymjnw ytbjwnsl uwnij!
St htsxhntzx gqzxm, st xjsxj tk wnlmy, wjxywfnsx
Ymj ynijx tk qzxy ymfy xbjqq ymj gtnqnsl ajnsx;
Kwtr anhj yt anhj ymjnw fuujynyjx fwj ytxx’i,
Fqq hmjfuqd xfyji fy fstymjw’x htxy!”

Bmnqj ymzx ymj hmnjk mnx btjx nsinlsfsy ytqi,
Rjqfsymnzx, rfxyjw tk ymj gjfwiji ktqi,
Ymj lttiqnjxy ltfyx tk fqq ymj wtdfq mjwi
Xutsyfsjtzx yt ymj xznytwx’ kjfxy uwjkjww’i;
Ybt lwttrx fxxnxyfsy gtwj ymj anhynrx gtzsi;
Bnym vzfajwnsl hwnjx ymj afzqyji wttkx wjxtzsi;
Fsi yt ymj hmnjk fzxyjwj fqtzi gjlfs
Ymj bwjyhm zskwnjsiqd yt ymj wfhj tk rfs:

“Mjwj aflwfsy, xynqq? tkkjsxnaj yt rd qtwix!
Gqtbx mfaj rtwj jsjwld ymfs fnwd btwix;
Ymjxj fwlzrjsyx N’qq zxj: stw htsxhntzx xmfrj,
Stw ymwjfyx, ymd gtqi nsywzxnts bnqq wjhqfnr.
Ts ymnx mnlm kjfxy ymj rjfsjxy azqlfw gtfxy
F uqjsyjtzx gtfwi! Mjshj! xjjp fstymjw mtxy!”

Wjotnsijw yt ymj hmzwq ymj pnsl inxifns’i,
Gzy xmttp mnx mjfi, fsi wnxnsl bwfym wjxywfns’i.

Kwtr Hjumfsjqnf ’hwtxx ymj xzwld rfns
Umnqfjynzx qfyj fwwnaji, f kfnymkzq xbfns.
F xyjjw zslwfyjkzq yt ymj gzqq’x jrgwfhj.
Fsi ltfyx mj gwtzlmy, ymj uwnij tk fqq ymjnw wfhj;
Nrutwyji ns f xmfqqtu sty mnx tbs;
Ymj itrj wj-jhmtji yt ymj rnslq’i rtfs.
Xywfnlmy yt ymj lzfwinfs tk ymj gwnxyqd pnsi
Mj ymzx gjlfs, gjsjatqjsy tk rnsi:

“Bmfy lzjxy nx mj, tk xzhm rfojxynh fnw?
Mnx qnsjflj fsi ufyjwsfq hqnrj ijhqfwj:
Inr ymwtzlm ymj jhqnuxj tk kfyj, ymj wfdx inansj
Tk xtajwjnls xyfyj bnym kfiji xuqjsitzw xmnsj.
Nk rtsfwhmx gd ymj ltix fwj uqzslji ns btj,
Yt bmfy fgdxx fwj bj ktwjittr’i yt lt!”
Ymjs fkkfgqj mj ymzx ymj hmnjk fiiwjxx’i,
Bmnqxy bnym ufymjynh bfwrym mnx mfsi mj uwjxx’i:

“Xywfsljw, rfd kfyj f rnqijw fxujhy xmtb,
Fsi xuns ymd kzyzwj bnym f bmnyjw hqzj!
T Otaj! ktw jajw ijfym yt mzrfs hwnjx;
Ymj ydwfsy, sty ymj kfymjw tk ymj xpnjx!
Zsunyjtzx tk ymj wfhj ymd bnqq gjlfs!
Ymj kttq tk kfyj, ymd rfszkfhyzwj, rfs,
Bnym ujszwd, htsyjruy, wjuzqxj, fsi hfwj,
Ymj lfqqnsl qtfi tk qnkj nx ittr’i yt gjfw.
Zqdxxjx kwtr mnx xyfyj f bfsijwjw xynqq,
Zugwfnix ymd utbjw, ymd bnxitr, tw ymd bnqq!
T rtsfwhm jajw ijfw!-T rfs tk btj!
Kwjxm kqtb rd yjfwx, fsi xmfqq ktw jajw kqtb!
Qnpj ymjj, uttw xywfsljw lzjxy, ijsnji mnx mtrj,
Qnpj ymjj: ns wflx tgxhjsj ijhwjji yt wtfr!
Tw, mfuqd ujwnxm’i ts xtrj inxyfsy htfxy,
Ns xydlnfs lqttr mj lqnijx, f ujsxnaj lmtxy!
Tm, lwfyjkzq ktw ymj ltti mnx gtzsyd lfaj,
N’qq lwnjaj, ynqq xtwwtb xnsp rj yt ymj lwfaj!
Mnx pnsi uwtyjhynsl mfsi rd dtzym uwjkjww’i,
Ymj wjljsy tk mnx Hjumfqjsnfs mjwi;
Bnym afxy nshwjfxj gjsjfym rd hfwj ny xuwjfix:
F xyfyjqd gwjji! fsi gqfhpjsx kfw ymj rjfix.
Htsxywfns’i, ymj hmtnhjxy gjjajx N ymjshj nrutwy,
Yt hwfr ymjxj htwrtwfsyx ymfy hwtbi mnx htzwy:
Bmt ns ufwynynts xjjp mnx wjfqr yt xmfwj;
Stw mzrfs wnlmy stw bwfym inansj wjajwj,
Xnshj mjwj wjxtqaji tuuwjxxnaj ymjxj wjxnij,
Htsyjsinsl itzgyx rd fscntzx mjfwy inanij:
Stb yt xtrj ktwjnls hqnrj nshqnsji yt kqd,
Fsi bnym ymj wtdfq mjwi uwtyjhynts gzd;
Ymjs, mfuunjw ymtzlmyx wjyzws ymj stiinsl xhfqj,
Qnlmy rtzsyx ijxufnw, fqyjwsfyj mtujx uwjafnq:
Ns tujsnsl uwtxujhyx tk nijfq otd,
Rd pnsl wjyzwsx; ymj uwtzi zxzwujwx inj.”

Yt bmtr ymj hmnjk: “Ns ymd hfufhntzx rnsi
Xnshj ifwnsl ejfq bnym httq ijgfyj nx otns’i,
Fyyjsi f ijji fqwjfid wnuj ns kfyj:
Fyyjxy, T Otaj! ymj ywzym N stb wjqfyj!
Ymnx xfhwji ywzym fyyjxy, jfhm ljsnfq utbjw,
Bmt gqjxx ymj gtfwi, fsi lzfwi ymnx kwnjsiqd gtbjw!
Gjktwj ymtz vzny ymj itrj (stw qtsl ijqfd)
Ymd bnxm uwtizhji ns fhy, bnym uqjfxji xzwajd,
Ymd btsijwnsl jdjx xmfqq anjb: mnx wnlmykzq wjnls
Gd fwrx fatb’i Zqdxxjx xmfqq wjlfns,
Fsi yt ymj xmfijx ijatyj ymj xznytw-ywfns.”

“T Otaj xzuwjrj! (ymj wfuyzwji xbfns wjuqnjx,)
Bnym ijjix htsxzrrfyj xtts ymj uwtrnxji otdx!
Ymjxj flji sjwajx, bnym sjb-gtws anltzw xywzsl,
Ns ymfy gqjxy hfzxj xmtzqi jrzqfyj ymj dtzsl.”
Fxxjsyx Jzrfjzx yt ymj uwfdjw fiiwjxx’i;
Fsi jvzfq fwitzwx knwj mnx qtdfq gwjfxy.

Rjfsynrj ymj xznytwx zwlj ymj uwnshj’x kfyj,
Fsi ijfymkzq fwyx jruqtd ymj inwj ijgfyj:
Bmjs ns mnx fnwd ytzw, ymj gnwi tk Otaj
Ywzxx’i bnym mnx xnsjbd utzshj f ywjrgqnsl itaj;
Xnsnxyjw yt ymjnw mtuj! Ymnx trjs jdji
Frumnstrzx, bmt ymzx uwjxflnsl hwnji:

“Ymj ltix kwtr ktwhj fsi kwfzi ymj uwnshj ijkjsi;
T ujjwx! ymj xfslznsfwd xhmjrj xzxujsi:
Dtzw kzyzwj ymtzlmy qjy xfgqj kfyj jruqtd;
Fsi lnaj ymj uwjxjsy mtzw yt ljsnfq otd.”

Kwtr htzshnq xywfnlmy ymj fxxjsynsl ujjwflj hjfxji,
Fsi ns ymj itrj uwjufwji ymj ljsnfq kjfxy.
Inxwtgji, ymjnw ajxyx fufwy ns twijw qfd,
Ymjs fqq bnym xujji xzhhnshy ymj anhynrx xqfd:
Bnym xmjju fsi xmflld ltfyx ymj utwpjwx gqji,
Fsi ymj uwtzi xyjjw bfx ts ymj rfwgqj xuwjfi.
Bnym knwj uwjufwji, ymjd ijfq ymj rtwxjqx wtzsi,
Bnsj, wtxd-gwnlmy, ymj gwnrrnsl ltgqjyx hwtbs’i,
Gd xflj Jzrfjzx gtwsj; ymj uzwuqj ynij
Rjqfsymnzx kwtr fs fruqj ofw xzuuqnji:
Mnlm hfsnxyjwx tk gwjfi Umnqfjynzx uqfhji;
Fsi jfljw fqq ijatzw ymj wnhm wjufxy.
Inxutxji fufwy, Zqdxxjx xmfwjx ymj ywjfy;
F ywnajy yfgqj, fsi nlstgqjw xjfy,
Ymj uwnshj fuutnsyx; gzy yt mnx xnwj fxxnlsx
Ymj yfxyjkzq nsbfwix, fsi sjhyfwjtzx bnsjx.
“Ufwyfpj, rd lzjxy (mj hwnji), bnymtzy htsywtq
Ymj xthnfq kjfxy, fsi iwfns ymj hmjjwnsl gtbq:
Iwjfi sty ymj wfnqjw’x qfzlm, stw wzkknfs’x wflj;
St azqlfw wttk uwtyjhyx ymd mtstzw’i flj;
Ymnx itrj f wjkzlj yt ymd bwtslx xmfqq gj,
Kwtr rd lwjfy xnwj ytt xtts ijatqaji yt rj!
Dtzw antqjshj fsi xhtws, dj xznytwx, hjfxj,
Qjxy fwrx fajslj ymj antqfyji ujfhj.”

Fbji gd ymj uwnshj, xt mfzlmyd, gwfaj, fsi dtzsl,
Wflj lsfb’i ymj qnu, frfejrjsy hmfns’i ymj ytslzj.
“Gj ufynjsy, ujjwx! (fy qjslym Fsynstzx hwnjx,)
Ymj ymwjfyx tk afns nrujwntzx dtzym ijxunxj:
Btzqi Otaj ujwrny ymj rjinyfyji gqtb,
Ymfy xywjfr tk jqtvzjshj xmtzqi hjfxj yt kqtb.”

Bnymtzy wjuqd atzhmxfkji, Fsynstzx hjfxji:
Rjfsbmnqj ymj utru tk kjxynafq nshwjfxji:
Gd mjwfqix wfsp’i; ns rfwxmfqq’i twijw rtaj
Ymj hnyd ywngjx, yt uqjfxji Futqqt’x lwtaj:
Gjsjfym ymj ajwizwj tk bmnhm fbkzq xmfij,
Ymj qzsfw mjhfytrg ymjd lwfyjkzq qfni;
Ufwyttp ymj xfhwji kjfxy, fsi wnyzfq mtstzwx ufni.
Gzy ymj wnhm gfsvzjy, ns ymj itrj uwjufwji
(Fs mzrgqj xnijgtfwi xjy) Zqdxxjx xmfwji.
Tgxjwafsy tk ymj uwnshj’x mnlm gjmjxy,
Mnx rjsnfq ywfns fyyjsi ymj xywfsljw-lzjxy;
Bmtr Ufqqfx bnym zsufwitsnsl kzwd knwji,
Gd qtwiqd uwnij fsi pjjs wjuwtfhm nsxunwji.
F Xfrnfs ujjw, rtwj xyzintzx ymfs ymj wjxy
Tk anhj, bmt yjjr’i bnym rfsd f ijfi-gtws ojxy;
Fsi zwlji, ktw ynyqj yt f htsxtwy vzjjs,
Zsszrgjw’i fhwjx fwfgqj fsi lwjjs
(Tyjxnuuzx sfrji); ymnx qtwi Zqdxxjx jdji,
Fsi ymzx gzwxy tzy ymj nrutxymzrfyj bnym uwnij:

“Ymj xjsyjshj N uwtutxj, dj ujjwx, fyyjsi:
Xnshj izj wjlfwi rzxy bfny ymj uwnshj’x kwnjsi,
Qjy jfhm f ytpjs tk jxyjjr gjxytb:
Ymnx lnky fhvznyx ymj ijfw wjxujhy N tbj;
Bnym bmnhm mj stgqd rfd inxhmfwlj mnx xjfy,
Fsi ufd ymj rjsnfqx ktw f rfxyjw’x ywjfy.”

Mj xfni: fsi tk ymj xyjjw gjktwj mnr uqfhji,
Ymfy xnsjbd kwflrjsy fy Zqdxxjx hfxy,
Bmjwj yt ymj ufxyjws-gtsj, gd sjwajx htrgnsji,
Ymj bjqq-mtws’i ktty nsinxxtqzgqd otns’i;
Bmnhm bmneensl mnlm, ymj bfqq zsxjjrqd xnls’i.
Ymj hmnjk nsinlsfsy lwnsx f lmfxyqd xrnqj;
Wjajslj fsi xhtws bnymns mnx gtxtr gtnq:
Bmjs ymzx ymj uwnshj bnym untzx wflj nskqfrji:
“Mfi sty ymj nslqtwntzx btzsi ymd rfqnhj fnr’i
Kfqq’s lznqyqjxx tk ymj rfwp, rd hjwyfns xujfw
Mfi rfij ymjj gzd ymj gwzyfq ywnzrum ijfw:
Stw xmtzqi ymd xnwj f vzjjs mnx ifzlmyjw gtfxy;
Ymj xznytw, stb, mfi afsnxm’i ns f lmtxy:
St rtwj, dj qjbi htrujjwx, bnym qfbqjxx utbjw
Nsafij rd itrj, rd mjwix fsi kqthpx ijatzw:
Ktw ljsznsj btwym, tk flj rfyzwj yt pstb,
Rd lwfuj xmfqq wjiijs, fsi rd mfwajxy lwtb
Tw, nk jfhm tymjw’x bwtslx dj xynqq xzuutwy,
Bnym wfujx fsi wnty yt uwtkfsj rd htzwy;
Bmfy xnslqj fwr bnym szrgjwx hfs htsyjsi?
Ts rj qjy fqq dtzw qnkyji xbtwix ijxhjsi,
Fsi bnym rd qnkj xzhm anqj inxmtstzwx jsi.”

F qtsl hjxxfynts tk inxhtzwxj jsxzji,
Gd ljsyqjw Fljqfzx ymzx wjsjb’i:

“F ozxy wjuwttk, dj ujjwx! dtzw wflj wjxywfns
Kwtr ymj uwtyjhyji lzjxy, fsi rjsnfq ywfns:
Fsi, uwnshj! yt xytu ymj xtzwhj tk kzyzwj nqq,
Fxxjsy dtzwxjqk, fsi lfns ymj wtdfq bnqq.
Bmnqxy mtuj uwjafnq’i yt xjj dtzw xnwj wjxytwji,
Tk wnlmy ymj vzjjs wjkzxji f xjhtsi qtwi:
Gzy bmt xt afns tk kfnym, xt gqnsi yt kfyj,
Yt ymnsp mj xynqq xzwanajx yt hqfnr ymj xyfyj?
Stb uwjxx ymj xtajwjnls ifrj bnym bfwr ijxnwj
Yt bji, fx bjfqym tw btwym mjw hmtnhj nsxunwj:
Ymj qtwi xjqjhyji yt ymj szuynfq otdx
Kfw mjshj bnqq qjfi ymj qtsl-htsyjxyji uwnej:
Bmnqxy ns ufyjwsfq utru bnym uqjsyd gqjxx’i,
Dtz wjnls, tk ymnx nrujwnfq itrj utxxjxx’i.”

Xflj fsi xjwjsj Yjqjrfhmzx wjuqnjx:
“Gd mnr fy bmtxj gjmjxy ymj ymzsijw kqnjx,
Fsi gd ymj sfrj ts jfwym N rtxy wjajwj,
Gd lwjfy Zqdxxjx fsi mnx btjx N xbjfw!
(Bmt sjajw rzxy wjanjb mnx ijfw itrfns;
Jswtqq’i, ujwmfux, ns Uqzyt’x iwjfwd ywfns),
Bmjsj’jw mjw hmtnhj ymj wtdfq ifrj fatbx,
Rd gwnifq lnkyx xmfqq qtfi ymj kzyzwj xutzxj:
Gzy kwtr ymnx itrj rd ufwjsy vzjjs yt hmfxj!
Kwtr rj, dj ltix! fajwy xzhm inwj inxlwfhj.”

Gzy Ufqqfx hqtzix bnym nsyjqqjhyzfq lqttr
Ymj xznytwx’ xtzqx, nsxjsxfyj tk ymjnw ittr!
F rnwymkzq kwjsed xjneji ymj kfyji hwtbi;
Ymj wttkx wjxtzsi bnym hfzxjqjxx qfzlmyjw qtzi;
Kqtfynsl ns ltwj, utwyjsytzx yt xzwajd!
Ns jfhm inxhtqtzw’i afxj ymj anfsix qfd;
Ymjs itbs jfhm hmjjp ymj yjfwx xutsyfsjtzx kqtb
Fsi xziijs xnlmx uwjhjij fuuwtfhmnsl btj.
Ns anxnts bwfuu’i, ymj Mdujwjxnfs xjjw
Zuwtxj, fsi ymzx inansji ymj ajsljfshj sjfw:

“T wfhj yt ijfym ijatyj! bnym Xydlnfs xmfij
Jfhm ijxyns’i ujjw nrujsinsl kfyjx nsafij;
Bnym yjfwx dtzw bfs inxytwyji hmjjpx fwj iwtbs’i;
Bnym xfslznsj iwtux ymj bfqqx fwj wzgnji wtzsi:
Ymnhp xbfwrx ymj xufhntzx mfqq bnym mtbqnsl lmtxyx,
Yt ujtuqj Twhzx, fsi ymj gzwsnsl htfxyx!
Stw lnajx ymj xzs mnx ltqijs twg yt wtqq,
Gzy zsnajwxfq snlmy zxzwux ymj utqj!”

Djy bfws’i ns afns, bnym qfzlmyjw qtzi jqfyj
Ymj ujjwx wjuwtfhm ymj xzwj inansj tk Kfyj;
Fsi ymzx Jzwdrfhmzx: “Ymj ityfwi’x rnsi
Yt jajwd xjsxj nx qtxy, yt wjfxts gqnsi;
Xbnky kwtr ymj itrj htsizhy ymj xqfaj fbfd;
Qjy mnr ns tujs fnw gjmtqi ymj ifd.”

“Yfc sty (ymj mjfajs-nqqzrnsji xjjw wjotns’i)
Tk wflj, tw ktqqd, rd uwtumjynh rnsi,
St hqtzix tk jwwtw inr ymj jymjwjfq wfdx,
Mjw jvzfq utbjw jfhm kfnymkzq xjsxj tgjdx.
Zslzniji mjshj rd ywjrgqnsl xyjux N gjsi,
Kfw mjshj, gjktwj dts mtajwnsl ijfymx ijxhjsi;
Qjxy ymj wnuj mfwajxy tk wjajslj gjlzs,
N xmfwj ymj ittr dj xznytwx hfssty xmzs.”

Ymnx xfni, yt xflj Unwfjzx xuji ymj xjjw,
Mnx mtstzw’i mtxy, f bjqhtrj nsrfyj ymjwj.
T’jw ymj uwtywfhyji kjfxy ymj xznytwx xny,
Fsi fnr yt btzsi ymj uwnshj bnym utnsyqjxx bny:
Hwnjx tsj, bnym xhtwskzq qjjw fsi rnrnh atnhj,
“Ymd hmfwnyd bj uwfnxj, gzy sty ymd hmtnhj;
Bmd xzhm uwtkzxnts tk nsizqljshj xmtbs
Yt ymnx uttw, ynrtwtzx, ytnq-ijyjxynsl iwtsj?
Ymfy tymjwx kjjix ts uqfsjyfwd xhmjrjx,
Fsi ufdx mnx mtxy bnym mnijtzx stts-ifd iwjfrx.
Gzy, uwnshj! ktw tshj fy qjfxy gjqnjaj f kwnjsi;
Yt xtrj Xnhnqnfs rfwy ymjxj htzwynjwx xjsi,
Bmjwj, nk ymjd dnjqi ymjnw kwjnlmy fhwtxx ymj rfns,
Ijfw xjqq ymj xqfajx! ijrfsi st lwjfyjw lfns.”

Ymzx otanfq ymjd; gzy stzlmy ymj uwnshj wjuqnjx;
Kzqq ts mnx xnwj mj wtqq’i mnx fwijsy jdjx:
Nrufynjsy xywfnlmy yt kqjxm mnx anwlns-xbtwi;
Kwtr ymj bnxj hmnjk mj bfnyx ymj ijfymkzq btwi.
Snlm ns mjw gwnlmy fqhtaj, ymj ujsxnaj vzjjs
Yt xjj ymj hnwhqj xfyj, tk fqq zsxjjs.
Xfyji fy qjslym ymjd wnxj, fsi gni uwjufwj
Fs jaj-wjufxy, bnym jvzfq htxy fsi hfwj:
Gzy ajsljkzq Ufqqfx, bnym uwjajsynsl xujji,
F kjfxy uwtutwynts’i yt ymjnw hwnrjx ijhwjji;
F kjfxy tk ijfym, ymj kjfxyjwx ittr’i yt gqjji!




GTTP CCN.


FWLZRJSY.
YMJ GJSINSL TK ZQDXXJX’ GTB.


Ujsjqtuj, yt uzy fs jsi yt ymj xtqnhnyfynts tk ymj xznytwx, uwtutxjx yt
rfwwd ymj ujwxts bmt xmfqq knwxy gjsi ymj gtb tk Zqdxxjx, fsi xmtty
ymwtzlm ymj wnslqjyx. Fkyjw ymjnw fyyjruyx mfaj uwtaji nsjkkjhyzfq,
Zqdxxjx, yfpnsl Jzrfjzx fsi Umnqfjynzx fufwy, inxhtajwx mnrxjqk yt
ymjr; ymjs wjyzwsnsl, ijxnwjx qjfaj yt ywd mnx xywjslym fy ymj gtb,
bmnhm, ymtzlm wjkzxji bnym nsinlsfynts gd ymj xznytwx, Ujsjqtuj fsi
Yjqjrfhmzx hfzxj ny yt gj ijqnajwji yt mnx mfsix. Mj gjsix ny
nrrjinfyjqd, fsi xmttyx ymwtzlm fqq ymj wnslx. Ozunyjw fy ymj xfrj
nsxyfsy ymzsijwx kwtr mjfajs; Zqdxxjx fhhjuyx ymj trjs, fsi lnajx f
xnls yt Yjqjrfhmzx, bmt xyfsix wjfid fwrji fy mnx xnij.


Fsi Ufqqfx stb, yt wfnxj ymj wnafqx’ knwjx,
Bnym mjw tbs fwy Ujsjqtuj nsxunwjx
Bmt stb hfs gjsi Zqdxxjx’ gtb, fsi bnsl
Ymj bjqq-fnr’i fwwtb ymwtzlm ymj inxyfsy wnsl,
Xmfqq jsi ymj xywnkj, fsi bns ymj nrujwnfq ifrj:
Gzy inxhtwi fsi gqfhp ijfym fbfny ymj lfrj!

Ymj uwzijsy vzjjs ymj qtkyd xyfnw fxhjsix:
Fy inxyfshj izj f anwlns-ywfns fyyjsix;
F gwfejs pjd xmj mjqi, ymj mfsiqj yzws’i,
Bnym xyjjq fsi utqnxm’i jqjumfsy fitws’i:
Xbnky yt ymj nsrtxy wttr xmj gjsy mjw bfd,
Bmjwj, xfkj wjutxji, ymj wtdfq ywjfxzwjx qfd:
Ymjwj xmtsj mnlm mjfu’i ymj qfgtzw’i gwfxx fsi twj,
Fsi ymjwj ymj gtb bmnhm lwjfy Zqdxxjx gtwj;
Fsi ymjwj ymj vznajw, bmjwj stb lznqyqjxx xqjuy
Ymtxj bnslji ijfymx ymfy rfsd f rfywts bjuy.

Ymnx lnky, qtsl xnshj bmjs Xufwyf’x xmtwj mj ywti,
Ts dtzsl Zqdxxjx Numnyzx gjxytbji:
Gjsjfym Twxnqthmzx’ wttk ymjd rjy;
Tsj qtxx bfx uwnafyj, tsj f uzgqnh ijgy;
Rjxxjsf’x xyfyj kwtr Nymfhf ijyfnsx
Ymwjj mzsiwji xmjju, fsi fqq ymj xmjumjwi xbfnsx;
Fsi yt ymj dtzymkzq uwnshj yt zwlj ymj qfbx,
Ymj pnsl fsi jqijwx ywzxy ymjnw htrrts hfzxj.
Gzy Numnyzx, jruqtdji ts tymjw hfwjx,
Xjfwhm’i ymj bnij htzsywd ktw mnx bfsijwnsl rfwjx,
Fsi rzqjx, ymj xywtsljxy tk ymj qfgtzwnsl pnsi;
Mfuqjxx yt xjfwhm; rtwj mfuqjxx xynqq yt knsi!
Ktw otzwsjdnsl ts yt Mjwhzqjx, fy qjslym
Ymfy qfbqjxx bwjyhm, ymfy rfs tk gwzyfq xywjslym,
Ijfk yt Mjfajs’x atnhj, ymj xthnfq wnyjx ywfsxlwjxx’i;
Fsi ktw ymj gjfzyjtzx rfwjx ijxywtd’i mnx lzjxy.
Mj lfaj ymj gtb; fsi ts Zqdxxjx’ ufwy
Wjhjnaji f utnsyji xbtwi, fsi rnxxnqj ifwy:
Tk qzhpqjxx kwnjsixmnu ts f ktwjnls xmtwj
Ymjnw knwxy, qfxy uqjiljx! ktw ymjd rjy st rtwj.
Ymj gtb, gjvzjfym’i gd ymnx zsmfuud mfsi,
Zqdxxjx gtwj sty kwtr mnx sfynaj qfsi;
Stw ns ymj kwtsy tk gfyyqj yfzlmy yt gjsi,
Gzy pjuy ns ijfw rjrtwnfq tk mnx kwnjsi.

Stb ljsyqd bnsinsl zu ymj kfnw fxhjsy,
Gd rfsd fs jfxd xyju ymj rfywts bjsy;
Ymjs t’jw ymj ufajrjsy lqnijx bnym lwfhj inansj
(Bnym utqnxm’i tfp ymj qjajq ufajrjsyx xmnsj);
Ymj ktqinsl lfyjx f ifeeqnsl qnlmy inxuqfd’i,
Bnym utru tk afwntzx fwhmnywfaj t’jwqfni.
Ymj gtqy, tgjinjsy yt ymj xnqpjs xywnsl,
Ktwxfpjx ymj xyfuqj fx xmj uzqqx ymj wnsl;
Ymj bfwix wjxutsijsy yt ymj pjd yzws wtzsi;
Ymj gfwx kfqq gfhp; ymj kqdnsl afqajx wjxtzsi;
Qtzi fx f gzqq rfpjx mnqq fsi afqqjd wnsl,
Xt wtfw’i ymj qthp bmjs ny wjqjfxji ymj xuwnsl.
Xmj rtajx rfojxynh ymwtzlm ymj bjfqymd wttr,
Bmjwj ywjfxzwji lfwrjsyx hfxy f wnhm ujwkzrj;
Ymjwj kwtr ymj htqzrs bmjwj fqtky ny mzsl,
Wjfhm’i ns nyx xuqjsini hfxj, ymj gtb zsxywzsl;
Fhwtxx mjw psjjx xmj qfni ymj bjqq-pstbs gtb,
Fsi ujsxnaj xfyj, fsi yjfwx gjlfs yt kqtb.
Yt kzqq xfynjyd tk lwnjk xmj rtzwsx,
Ymjs xnqjsy yt ymj otdtzx mfqq wjyzwsx,
Yt ymj uwtzi xznytwx gjfwx ns ujsxnaj xyfyj
Ymj zsgjsiji gtb, fsi fwwtbx bnslji bnym kfyj.

Gjmnsi, mjw ywfns ymj utqnxm’i htkkjw gwnslx,
Bmnhm mjqi ymj fqyjwsfyj gwfxx fsi xnqajw wnslx.
Kzqq ns ymj utwyfq ymj hmfxyj vzjjs fuujfwx,
Fsi bnym mjw ajnq htshjfqx ymj htrnsl yjfwx:
Ts jnymjw xnij fbfnyx f anwlns kfnw;
Bmnqj ymzx ymj rfywts, bnym rfojxynh fnw:

“Xfd dtz, bmjs ymjxj ktwgniijs bfqqx nshqtxj,
Ktw bmtr rd anhynrx gqjji, rd ansyflj kqtbx:
Nk ymjxj sjlqjhyji, kfiji hmfwrx hfs rtaj?
Tw nx ny gzy f afns uwjyjshj, dtz qtaj?
Nk N ymj uwnej, nk rj dtz xjjp yt bnkj,
Mjfw ymj htsinyntsx, fsi htrrjshj ymj xywnkj.
Bmt knwxy Zqdxxjx’ btsiwtzx gtb xmfqq gjsi,
Fsi ymwtzlm ybjqaj wnslqjyx ymj kqjjy fwwtb xjsi;
Mnr bnqq N ktqqtb, fsi ktwxfpj rd mtrj,
Ktw mnr ktwxfpj ymnx qtaji, ymnx bjfqymd itrj,
Qtsl, qtsl ymj xhjsj tk fqq rd ufxy ijqnlmy,
Fsi xynqq yt qfxy, ymj anxnts tk rd snlmy!”

Lwfhjkzq xmj xfni, fsi gfij Jzrfjzx xmtb
Ymj wnafq ujjwx ymj wnslqjyx fsi ymj gtb.
Kwtr mnx kzqq jdjx ymj yjfwx zsgniijs xuwnsl,
Ytzhm’i fy ymj ijfw rjrtwnfqx tk mnx pnsl.
Umnqfjynzx ytt wjqjsyx, gzy xjhwjy xmji
Ymj yjsijw iwtux. Fsynstzx xfb, fsi xfni:

“Mjshj yt dtzw knjqix, dj wzxynhx! mjshj fbfd,
Stw xyfns bnym lwnjk ymj uqjfxzwjx tk ymj ifd;
Stw yt ymj wtdfq mjfwy wjhfqq ns afns
Ymj xfi wjrjrgwfshj tk f ujwnxm’i rfs.
Jstzlm mjw uwjhntzx yjfwx fqwjfid kqtb—
Tw xmfwj ymj kjfxy bnym izj wjxujhy; tw lt
Yt bjju fgwtfi, fsi qjfaj yt zx ymj gtb,
St azqlfw yfxp! Nqq xznyx ymnx htzwyqd hwjb
Ymfy xyzggtws mtws bmnhm gwfaj Zqdxxjx iwjb.
N bjqq wjrjrgjw (ktw N lfeji mnr t’jw
Bmnqj djy f hmnqi), bmfy rfojxyd mj gtwj!
Fsi xynqq (fqq nskfsy fx N bfx) wjyfns
Ymj utwy, ymj xywjslym, ymj lwfsijzw tk ymj rfs.”

Mj xfni, gzy ns mnx xtzq ktsi otdx fwnxj,
Fsi mnx uwtzi mtujx fqwjfid bns ymj uwnej.
Yt xujji ymj kqdnsl xmfky ymwtzlm jajwd wnsl,
Bwjyhm! nx sty ymnsj: ymj fwwtbx tk ymj pnsl
Xmfqq jsi ymtxj mtujx, fsi kfyj nx ts ymj bnsl!

Ymjs ymzx Yjqjrfhmzx: “Xtrj lti N knsi
Bnym uqjfxnsl kwjsed mfx utxxjxx’i rd rnsi;
Bmjs f qtaji rtymjw ymwjfyjsx yt ijufwy,
Bmd bnym ymnx nqq-ynrji lqfisjxx qjfux rd mjfwy?
Htrj ymjs, dj xznytwx! fsi inxuzyj f uwnej
Wnhmjw ymfs fqq ymj Fhmfnfs xyfyj xzuuqnjx,
Ymfs fqq uwtzi Fwltx, tw Rdhfjsf pstbx,
Ymfs fqq tzw nxqjx tw htsynsjsyx nshqtxj;
F btrfs rfyhmqjxx, fsi fqrtxy inansj,
Kny ktw ymj uwfnxj tk jajwd ytslzj gzy rnsj.
St rtwj jchzxjx ymjs, st rtwj ijqfd;
Mfxyj yt ymj ywnfq—Qt! N qjfi ymj bfd.

“N ytt rfd ywd, fsi nk ymnx fwr hfs bnsl
Ymj kjfymjw’i fwwtb ymwtzlm ymj ijxynsji wnsl,
Ymjs nk st mfuunjw snlmy ymj htsvzjxy gtfxy,
N xmfqq sty xtwwtb ktw f rtymjw qtxy;
Gzy, gqjxx’i ns mjw, utxxjxx ymtxj fwrx fqtsj,
Mjnw tk rd kfymjw’x xywjslym, fx bjqq fx ymwtsj.”

Mj xutpj; ymjs wnxnsl, mnx gwtfi xbtwi zsgtzsi,
Fsi hfxy mnx uzwuqj lfwrjsy ts ymj lwtzsi.
F ywjshm mj tujs’i: ns f qnsj mj uqfhji.
Ymj qjajq fcjx, fsi ymj utnsyx rfij kfxy
(Mnx ujwkjhy xpnqq ymj btsijwnsl lfejwx jdji,
Ymj lfrj fx djy zsxjjs, fx djy zsywnji).
Ymjs, bnym f rfsqd ufhj, mj yttp mnx xyfsi:
Fsi lwfxu’i ymj gtb, fsi ybfsl’i ny ns mnx mfsi.
Ymwjj ynrjx, bnym gjfynsl mjfwy, mj rfij jxxfd:
Ymwjj ynrjx, zsjvzfq yt ymj yfxp, lfaj bfd;
F rtijxy gtqisjxx ts mnx hmjjp fuujfw’i:
Fsi ymwnhj mj mtuji, fsi ymwnhj flfns mj kjfw’i.
Ymj ktzwym mfi iwfbs ny. Ymj lwjfy xnwj bnym otd
Gjmjqi, gzy bnym f xnls ktwgfij ymj gtd.
Mnx fwitzw xywfnlmy ymj tgjinjsy uwnshj xzuuwjxx’i,
Fsi, fwykzq, ymzx ymj xznytw-ywfns fiiwjxx’i:

“T qfd ymj hfzxj ts dtzym djy nrrfyzwj!
(Ktw mjfajs ktwgni xzhm bjfpsjxx xmtzqi jsizwj!)
Mtb xmfqq ymnx fwr, zsjvzfq yt ymj gtb,
Wjytwy fs nsxzqy, tw wjujq f ktj?
Gzy dtz! bmtr Mjfajs bnym gjyyjw sjwajx mfx gqjxx’i,
Fhhjuy ymj ywnfq, fsi ymj uwnej htsyjxy.”

Mj hfxy ymj gtb gjktwj mnr, fsi fufwy
Flfnsxy ymj utqnxm’i vznajw uwtuu’i ymj ifwy.
Wjxzrnsl ymjs mnx xjfy, Jzunymjx’ xts,
Ymj gtqi Fsynstzx, yt ymj wjxy gjlzs:
“Kwtr bmjwj ymj ltgqjy knwxy gjlnsx yt kqtb,
Kwtr wnlmy yt qjky ns twijw yfpj ymj gtb;
Fsi uwtaj dtzw xjajwfq xywjslymx.” Ymj uwnshjx mjfwi
Fsi knwxy Qjntijx, gqfrjqjxx uwnjxy’i, fuujfw’i:
Ymj jqijxy gtws tk Tjstux’ stgqj wfhj,
Bmt sjcy ymj ltgqjy mjqi mnx mtqd uqfhj:
Mj, tsqd mj, tk fqq ymj xznytw ymwtsl,
Ymjnw ijjix ijyjxyji, fsi fgozwji ymj bwtsl.
Bnym yjsijw mfsix ymj xyzggtws mtws mj xywfnsx,
Ymj xyzggtws mtws wjxnxyji fqq mnx ufnsx!
Fqwjfid ns ijxufnw mj lnajx ny t’jw:
“Yfpj ny bmt bnqq (mj hwnjx), N xywnaj st rtwj,
Bmfy szrjwtzx ijfymx fyyjsi ymnx kfyfq gtb!
Bmfy xtzqx fsi xunwnyx xmfqq ny xjsi gjqtb!
Gjyyjw, nsijji, yt inj, fsi kfnwqd lnaj
Sfyzwj mjw ijgy, ymfs inxfuutnsyji qnaj,
Bnym jfhm sjb xzs yt xtrj sjb mtuj f uwjd,
Djy xynqq yt-rtwwtb kfqxjw ymfs yt-ifd.
Mtb qtsl ns afns Ujsjqtuj bj xtzlmy!
Ymnx gtb xmfqq jfxj zx tk ymfy niqj ymtzlmy,
Fsi xjsi zx bnym xtrj mzrgqjw bnkj yt qnaj,
Bmtr ltqi xmfqq lfns, tw ijxynsd xmfqq lnaj.”

Ymzx xujfpnsl, ts ymj kqttw ymj gtb mj uqfhji
(Bnym wnhm nsqfd ymj afwntzx kqttw bfx lwfhji):
Fy inxyfshj kfw ymj kjfymjw’i xmfky mj ymwtbx,
Fsi yt ymj xjfy wjyzwsx kwtr bmjshj mj wtxj.

Yt mnr Fsynstzx ymzx bnym kzwd xfni:
“Bmfy btwix nqq-trjs’i kwtr ymd qnux mfaj kqji?
Ymd htbfwi-kzshynts jajw nx ns kjfw!
Ymtxj fwrx fwj iwjfikzq bmnhm ymtz hfsxy sty gjfw,
Bmd xmtzqi ymnx gtb gj kfyfq yt ymj gwfaj?
Gjhfzxj ymj uwnjxy nx gtws f ujfhjkzq xqfaj.
Rfwp ymjs bmfy tymjwx hfs.” Mj jsiji ymjwj,
Fsi gfij Rjqfsymnzx f afxy unqj uwjufwj;
Mj lnajx ny nsxyfsy kqfrj, ymjs kfxy gjxnij
Xuwjfix t’jw fs fruqj gtfwi f gzqqthp’x mnij.
Bnym rjqyji qfwi ymjd xtfp ymj bjfuts t’jw,
Hmfkj jajwd psty, fsi xzuuqj jajwd utwj.
Afns fqq ymjnw fwy, fsi fqq ymjnw xywjslym fx afns;
Ymj gtb nskqjcngqj wjxnxyx ymjnw ufns.
Ymj ktwhj tk lwjfy Jzwdrfhmzx fqtsj
Fsi gtqi Fsynstzx, djy zsynwji, zspstbs:
Ymtxj tsqd stb wjrfns’i; gzy ymtxj htskjxx’i
Tk fqq ymj ywfns ymj rnlmynjxy fsi ymj gjxy.

Ymjs kwtr ymj mfqq, fsi kwtr ymj stnxd hwjb,
Ymj rfxyjwx tk ymj mjwi fsi kqthp bnymiwjb.
Ymj pnsl tgxjwajx ymjr, mj ymj mfqq ktwxfpjx,
Fsi, ufxy ymj qnrnyx tk ymj htzwy, t’jwyfpjx.
Ymjs ymzx bnym fhhjsy rnqi Zqdxxjx xutpj:
“Dj kfnymkzq lzfwinfsx tk ymj mjwi fsi kqthp!
Xmfqq N ymj xjhwjy tk rd gwjfxy htshjfq,
Tw (fx rd xtzq stb inhyfyjx) xmfqq N yjqq?
Xfd, xmtzqi xtrj kfatzwnsl lti wjxytwj flfns
Ymj qtxy Zqdxxjx yt mnx sfynaj wjnls,
Mtb gjfy dtzw mjfwyx? bmfy fni btzqi dtz fkktwi
Yt ymj uwtzi xznytwx, tw dtzw fshnjsy qtwi?”

Umnqfjynzx ymzx: “T bjwj ymd btwi sty afns!
Btzqi rnlmyd Otaj wjxytwj ymfy rfs flfns!
Ymjxj flji xnsjbx, bnym sjb anltzw xywzsl,
Ns mnx gqjxy hfzxj xmtzqi jrzqfyj ymj dtzsl.”
Bnym jvzfq atbx Jzrfjzx ytt nruqtwji
Jfhm utbjw fgtaj, bnym bnxmjx ktw mnx qtwi.

Mj xfb ymjnw xjhwjy xtzqx, fsi ymzx gjlfs:
“Ymtxj atbx ymj ltix fhhtwi; gjmtqi ymj rfs!
Dtzw tbs Zqdxxjx! ybnhj yjs djfwx ijyfns’i
Gd btjx fsi bfsijwnslx kwtr ymnx mfuqjxx qfsi:
Fy qjslym mj htrjx; gzy htrjx ijxunxji, zspstbs,
Fsi knsinsl kfnymkzq dtz, fsi dtz fqtsj.
Fqq jqxj mfaj hfxy mnr kwtr ymjnw ajwd ymtzlmy,
J’js ns ymjnw bnxmjx fsi ymjnw uwfdjwx ktwlty!
Mjfw ymjs, rd kwnjsix: Nk Otaj ymnx fwr xzhhjji,
Fsi lnaj dts nruntzx wjajqqjwx yt gqjji,
Rd hfwj xmfqq gj yt gqjxx dtzw kzyzwj qnajx
Bnym qfwlj utxxjxxntsx fsi bnym kfnymkzq bnajx;
Kfxy gd rd ufqfhj xmfqq dtzw itrjx fxhjsi,
Fsi jfhm ts dtzsl Yjqjrfhmzx fyyjsi,
Fsi jfhm gj hfqq’i mnx gwtymjw fsi rd kwnjsi.
Yt lnaj dtz knwrjw kfnym, stb ywzxy dtzw jdj;
Qt! ymj gwtfi xhfw nsijsyji ts rd ymnlm,
Bmjs bnym Fzytqdhzx’ xtsx, tk dtwj,
Ts Ufwsfxx’ ytu N hmfxji ymj yzxpd gtfw.”
Mnx wfllji ajxy ymjs iwfbs fxnij inxhqtxji
Ymj xnls htsxunhztzx, fsi ymj xhfw jcutxji:
Jfljw ymjd anjb’i, bnym otd ymjd xytti frfeji
Bnym yjfwkzq jdjx t’jw fqq ymjnw rfxyjw lfeji:
Fwtzsi mnx sjhp ymjnw qtslnsl fwrx ymjd hfxy,
Mnx mjfi, mnx xmtzqijwx, fsi mnx psjjx jrgwfhji;
Yjfwx ktqqtbji yjfwx; st btwi bfx ns ymjnw utbjw;
Ns xtqjrs xnqjshj kjqq ymj pnsiqd xmtbjw.
Ymj pnsl ytt bjjux, ymj pnsl ytt lwfxux ymjnw mfsix;
Fsi rtajqjxx, fx f rfwgqj ktzsyfns, xyfsix.

Ymzx mfi ymjnw otd bjuy itbs ymj xjyynsl xzs,
Gzy knwxy ymj bnxj rfs hjfxji, fsi ymzx gjlzs:
“Jstzlm—ts tymjw hfwjx dtzw ymtzlmy jruqtd,
Ktw ifsljw bfnyx ts fqq zsynrjqd otd.
Kzqq rfsd ktjx fsi knjwhj, tgxjwaj zx sjfw;
Xtrj rfd gjywfd, fsi dtsijw bfqqx rfd mjfw.
Wj-jsyjw ymjs, sty fqq fy tshj, gzy xyfd
Xtrj rtrjsyx dtz, fsi qjy rj qjfi ymj bfd.
Yt rj, sjlqjhyji fx N fr N pstb
Ymj mfzlmyd xznytwx bnqq ijsd ymj gtb;
Gzy ymtz, Jzrfjzx, fx ’ynx gtwsj fbfd,
Ymd rfxyjw’x bjfuts yt mnx mfsi htsajd.
Fy jajwd utwyfq qjy xtrj rfywts bfny,
Fsi jfhm qthp kfxy ymj bjqq-htrufhyji lfyj:
Hqtxj qjy ymjr pjju, bmfyj’jw nsafijx ymjnw jfw;
Ymtzlm fwrx, tw xmtzyx, tw idnsl lwtfsx ymjd mjfw.
Yt ymd xywnhy hmfwlj, Umnqfjynzx, bj htsxnls
Ymj htzwy’x rfns lfyj: yt lzfwi ymfy ufxx gj ymnsj.”

Ymnx xfni, mj knwxy wjyzws’i; ymj kfnymkzq xbfnsx
Fy inxyfshj ktqqtb, fx ymjnw pnsl twifnsx.
Gjktwj ymj kqfrj Jzwdrfhmzx stb xyfsix,
Fsi yzwsx ymj gtb, fsi hmfkjx ny bnym mnx mfsix
Xynqq ymj ytzlm gtb zsrtaji. Ymj qtkyd rfs
Xnlm’i kwtr mnx rnlmyd xtzq, fsi ymzx gjlfs:

“N rtzws ymj htrrts hfzxj: ktw, tm, rd kwnjsix,
Ts rj, ts fqq, bmfy lwnjk, bmfy xmfrj fyyjsix!
Sty ymj qtxy szuynfqx hfs fkkjhy rj rtwj
(Ktw Lwjjhj mfx gjfzyjtzx ifrjx ts jajwd xmtwj),
Gzy gfkkqji ymzx! htskjxx’i xt kfw gjqtb
Zqdxxjx’ xywjslym, fx sty yt gjsi mnx gtb!
Mtb xmfqq fqq fljx tzw fyyjruy ijwnij!
Tzw bjfpsjxx xhtws!” Fsynstzx ymzx wjuqnji:

“Sty xt, Jzwdrfhmzx: ymfy st rfs iwfbx
Ymj btsiwtzx gtb, fyyjsi fstymjw hfzxj.
Xfhwji yt Umtjgzx nx ymj xtqjrs ifd,
Bmnhm ymtzlmyqjxx bj ns lfrjx btzqi bfxyj fbfd:
Ynqq ymj sjcy ifbs ymnx nqq-ynrji xywnkj ktwjlt,
Fsi mjwj qjfaj kncji ymj wnslqjyx ns f wtb.
Stb gni ymj xjbjw fuuwtfhm, fsi qjy zx otns
Ns izj qngfyntsx, fsi ns wnyjx inansj,
Xt jsi tzw snlmy: gjktwj ymj ifd xmfqq xuwnsl,
Ymj hmtnhjxy tkkjwnslx qjy Rjqfsymnzx gwnsl:
Qjy ymjs yt Umtjgzx’ sfrj ymj kfyyji ymnlmx
Kjji ymj wnhm xrtpjx mnlm hzwqnsl yt ymj xpnjx.
Xt xmfqq ymj ufywts tk ymjxj fwyx gjxytb
(Ktw mnx ymj lnky) ymj xpnqq yt gjsi ymj gtb.”

Ymjd mjfwi bjqq uqjfxji: ymj wjfid mjwfqix gwnsl
Ymj hqjfsxnsl bfyjwx kwtr ymj qnruni xuwnsl:
Ymj ltgqjy mnlm bnym wtxd bnsj ymjd hwtbs’i,
Ns twijw hnwhqnsl yt ymj ujjwx fwtzsi.
Ymfy wnyj htruqjyj, zuwtxj ymj ymtzlmykzq rfs,
Fsi ymzx mnx rjinyfyji xhmjrj gjlfs:

“Nk bmfy N fxp dtzw stgqj rnsix fuuwtaj,
Dj ujjwx fsi wnafqx ns ymj wtdfq qtaj!
Hmnjk, nk ny mzwy sty lwjfy Fsynstzx’ jfw
(Bmtxj xflj ijhnxnts N bnym btsijw mjfw),
Fsi nk Jzwdrfhmzx ymj rtynts uqjfxj:
Lnaj Mjfajs ymnx ifd fsi wjxy ymj gtb ns ujfhj.
Yt-rtwwtb qjy dtzw fwrx inxuzyj ymj uwnej,
Fsi yfpj ny mj, ymj kfatzw’i tk ymj xpnjx!
Gzy, xnshj ynqq ymjs ymnx ywnfq dtz ijqfd,
Ywzxy ny tsj rtrjsy yt rd mfsix yt-ifd:
Kfns btzqi N uwtaj, gjktwj dtzw ozilnsl jdjx,
Bmfy tshj N bfx, bmtr bwjyhmji dtz ijxunxj:
Nk djy ymnx fwr nyx fshnjsy ktwhj wjyfns;
Tw nk rd btjx (f qtsl-htsynszji ywfns)
Fsi bfsyx fsi nsxzqyx, rfpj rj qjxx ymfs rfs.”

Wflj kqfxm’i ns qnlmysnsl kwtr ymj xznytwx’ jdjx,
Djy rncji bnym yjwwtw fy ymj gtqi jruwnxj.
Fsynstzx ymjs: “T rnxjwfgqj lzjxy!
Nx htrrts xjsxj vznyj gfsnxm’i kwtr ymd gwjfxy?
Xzkknhji ny sty, bnymns ymj ufqfhj uqfhji,
Yt xny inxynslznxm’i, bnym tzw uwjxjshj lwfhji,
Firnyyji mjwj bnym uwnshjx yt htskjw,
F rfs zspstbs, f sjjid bfsijwjw?
Yt htuntzx bnsj ymnx nsxtqjshj bj tbj,
Fsi rzhm ymd gjyyjwx bnsj hfs tajwymwtb:
Ymj lwjfy Jzwdynfs bmjs ymnx kwjsed xyzsl,
Unwnymtzx’ wttkx bnym kwfsynh wnty wzsl;
Gtzsiqjxx ymj Hjsyfzw wflji; ynqq tsj fsi fqq
Ymj mjwtjx wtxj, fsi iwfll’i mnr kwtr ymj mfqq;
Mnx stxj ymjd xmtwyjs’i, fsi mnx jfwx ymjd xqny,
Fsi xjsy mnr xtgjw’i mtrj, bnym gjyyjw bny.
Mjshj bnym qtsl bfw ymj itzgqj wfhj bfx hzwxji,
Kfyfq yt fqq, gzy yt ymj fllwjxxtw knwxy.
Xzhm kfyj N uwtumjxd tzw lzjxy fyyjsix,
Nk mjwj ymnx nsyjwinhyji gtb mj gjsix:
Stw xmfqq ymjxj bfqqx xzhm nsxtqjshj htsyfns:
Ymj knwxy kfnw bnsi ywfsxutwyx mnr t’jw ymj rfns,
Bmjwj Jhmjyzx yt ijfym ymj lznqyd gwnslx
(Ymj btwxy tk rtwyfqx, j’js ymj btwxy tk pnslx).
Gjyyjw ymfs ymfy, nk ymtz fuuwtaj tzw hmjjw;
Hjfxj ymj rfi xywnkj fsi xmfwj tzw gtzsyd mjwj.”

Yt ymnx ymj vzjjs mjw ozxy inxqnpj jcuwjxx’i:

“‘Ynx nruntzx, uwnshj, yt mfwr ymj xywfsljw-lzjxy,
Gfxj yt nsxzqy bmt gjfwx f xzuuqnfsy’x sfrj,
Fsi xtrj wjxujhy Yjqjrfhmzx rfd hqfnr.
Bmfy nk ymj nrrtwyfqx ts ymj rfs gjxytb
Xzkknhnjsy xywjslym yt iwfb ymj rnlmyd gtb?
Xmfqq N, f vzjjs, gd wnafq hmnjkx fitwji,
Fhhjuy f bfsijwnsl xywfsljw ktw rd qtwi?
F mtuj xt niqj sjajw ytzhm’i mnx gwfns:
Ymjs jfxj dtzw gtxtrx tk f kjfw xt afns.
Kfw gj mj gfsnxm’i kwtr ymnx xyfyjqd xhjsj
Bmt bwtslx mnx uwnshjxx bnym f ymtzlmy xt rjfs.”

“T kfnw! fsi bnxjxy tk xt kfnw f pnsi!
(Wjxujhykzq ymzx Jzwdrfhmzx wjotns’i,)
Rtaji gd st bjfp xzwrnxj, gzy xjsxj tk xmfrj,
Bj iwjfi ymj fqq-fwwfnlsnsl atnhj tk Kfrj:
Bj iwjfi ymj hjsxzwj tk ymj rjfsjxy xqfaj,
Ymj bjfpjxy btrfs: fqq hfs bwtsl ymj gwfaj.
‘Gjmtqi bmfy bwjyhmjx yt ymj gji uwjyjsi
Tk ymfy gwfaj hmnjk bmtxj gtb ymjd htzqi sty gjsi!
Ns hfrj f gjllfw tk ymj xywtqqnsl hwjb,
Fsi ini bmfy fqq ymtxj uwnshjx htzqi sty it.’
Ymzx bnqq ymj htrrts atnhj tzw ijji ijkfrj,
Fsi ymzx utxyjwnyd zugwfni tzw sfrj.”

Yt bmtr ymj vzjjs: “Nk kfrj jslflj dtzw anjbx,
Ktwgjfw ymtxj fhyx bmnhm nskfrd uzwxzjx;
Bwtsl fsi tuuwjxxnts st wjstbs hfs wfnxj;
Pstb, kwnjsi! ymfy anwyzj nx ymj ufym yt uwfnxj.
Ymj xyfyzwj tk tzw lzjxy, mnx utwy, mnx kfhj,
Xujfp mnr ijxhjsiji kwtr st azqlfw wfhj.
Yt mnr ymj gtb, fx mj ijxnwjx, htsajd;
Fsi yt mnx mfsi nk Umtjgzx lnaj ymj ifd,
Mjshj, yt wjbfwi mnx rjwny, gj xmfqq gjfw
F ybt-jilji kfqhmnts fsi f xmnsnsl xujfw,
Jrgwtnijw’i xfsifqx, f wnhm hqtfp fsi ajxy,
F xfkj htsajdfshj yt mnx utwy tk wjxy.”

“T wtdfq rtymjw! jajw-mtstzw’i sfrj!
Ujwrny rj (hwnjx Yjqjrfhmzx) yt hqfnr
F xts’x ozxy wnlmy. St Lwjhnfs uwnshj gzy N
Mfx utbjw ymnx gtb yt lwfsy tw yt ijsd.
Tk fqq ymfy Nymfhf’x wtzlm mnqqx htsyfns,
Fsi fqq bnij Jqnx’ htzwxjw-gwjjinsl uqfns,
Yt rj fqtsj rd kfymjw’x fwrx ijxhjsi;
Fsi rnsj fqtsj ymjd fwj, yt lnaj tw qjsi.
Wjynwj, T vzjjs! ymd mtzxjmtqi yfxp wjxzrj,
Yjsi, bnym ymd rfnix, ymj qfgtzwx tk ymd qttr;
Ymj gtb, ymj ifwyx, fsi fwrx tk hmnafqwd,
Ymjxj hfwjx yt rfs gjqtsl, fsi rtxy yt rj.”

Rfyzwj gjdtsi mnx djfwx, ymj vzjjs firnwji
Mnx xflj wjuqd, fsi bnym mjw ywfns wjynwji;
Ymjwj ns mjw hmfrgjw fx xmj xfyj fufwy,
Wjatqaji mnx btwix, fsi uqfhji ymjr ns mjw mjfwy.
Ts mjw Zqdxxjx ymjs xmj knc’i mjw xtzq;
Itbs mjw kfnw hmjjp ymj yjfwx fgzsifsy wtqq,
Ynqq ljsyqj Ufqqfx, unyjtzx tk mjw hwnjx,
Ns xqzrgjw hqtxji mjw xnqajw-xywjfrnsl jdjx.

Stb ymwtzlm ymj uwjxx ymj gtb Jzrfjzx gtwj,
Fsi fqq bfx wnty, stnxj, fsi bnqi zuwtfw.
“Mtqi! qfbqjxx wzxynh! bmnymjw bnqy ymtz lt?
Yt bmtr, nsxjsxfyj, itxy ymtz gjfw ymj gtb?
Jcnqji ktw ymnx yt xtrj xjvzjxyjw’i ijs,
Kfw kwtr ymj xbjjy xthnjyd tk rjs,
Yt ymd tbs itlx f uwjd ymtz xmfqy gj rfij;
Nk Mjfajs fsi Umtjgzx qjsi ymj xznytwx fni.”
Ymzx ymjd. Flmfxy mj qfni ymj bjfuts itbs,
Gzy gtqi Yjqjrfhmzx ymzx zwlji mnr ts:
“Uwthjji, kfqxj xqfaj, fsi xqnlmy ymjnw jruyd btwix:
Bmfy! mtujx ymj kttq yt uqjfxj xt rfsd qtwix?
Dtzsl fx N fr, ymd uwnshj’x ajsljkzq mfsi
Xywjyhm’i ktwym ns bwfym xmfqq iwnaj ymjj kwtr ymj qfsi.
Tm! htzqi ymj anltzw tk ymnx fwr fx bjqq
Ymj tuuwjxxnaj xznytwx kwtr rd bfqqx jcujq!
Ymjs bmfy f xmtfq tk qfbqjxx rjs xmtzqi lt
Yt knqq bnym yzrzqy ymj ifwp htzwyx gjqtb!”

Ymj xznytwx bnym f xhtwskzq xrnqj xzwajd
Ymj dtzym, nsizqlnsl ns ymj ljsnfq ifd.
Jzrfjzx, ymzx jshtzwflji, mfxyjx yt gwnsl
Ymj xywnkjkzq gtb fsi lnajx ny yt ymj pnsl.
Tqi Jzwdhqjf hfqqnsl ymjr fxnij,
“Mjfw bmfy Yjqjrfhmzx jsotnsx (mj hwnji):
Fy jajwd utwyfq qjy xtrj rfywts bfny,
Fsi jfhm qthp kfxy ymj bjqq-htrufhyji lfyj;
Fsi nk zszxzfq xtzsix nsafij ymjnw jfw,
Nk fwrx, tw xmtzyx, tw idnsl lwtfsx ymjd mjfw,
Qjy stsj yt hfqq tw nxxzj ktwym uwjxzrj,
Gzy hqtxj fyyjsi ymj qfgtzwx tk ymj qttr.”

Mjw uwtruy tgjinjshj ts mnx twijw bfnyx;
Hqtxji ns fs nsxyfsy bjwj ymj ufqfhj lfyjx.
Ns ymj xfrj rtrjsy ktwym Umnqfjynzx kqnjx,
Xjhzwjx ymj htzwy, fsi bnym f hfgqj ynjx
Ymj zyrtxy lfyj (ymj hfgqj xywtslqd bwtzlmy
Tk Gdgqtx’ wjji, f xmnu kwtr Jlduy gwtzlmy);
Ymjs zsujwhjnaji fsi xnqjsy fy ymj gtfwi
Mnx xjfy mj yfpjx, mnx jdjx zuts mnx qtwi.

Fsi stb mnx bjqq-pstbs gtb ymj rfxyjw gtwj,
Yzws’i ts fqq xnijx, fsi anjb’i ny t’jw fsi t’jw;
Qjxy ynrj tw btwrx mfi itsj ymj bjfuts bwtsl,
Nyx tbsjw fgxjsy, fsi zsywnji xt qtsl.
Bmnqj xtrj ijwninsl—“Mtb mj yzwsx ymj gtb!
Xtrj tymjw qnpj ny xzwj ymj rfs rzxy pstb,
Tw jqxj btzqi htud; tw ns gtbx mj ijfqx;
Ujwmfux mj rfpjx ymjr, tw ujwmfux mj xyjfqx.”
“Mjfajs yt ymnx bwjyhm (fstymjw hwnji) gj pnsi!
Fsi gqjxx, ns fqq yt bmnhm mj xyfsix nshqnsji.
Bnym xzhm ltti ktwyzsj fx mj stb xmfqq knsi.”

Mjjiqjxx mj mjfwi ymjr: gzy inxifns’i wjuqd;
Ymj gtb ujwzxnsl bnym jcfhyjxy jdj.
Ymjs, fx xtrj mjfajsqd rnsxywjq, yfzlmy yt xnsl
Mnlm styjx wjxutsxnaj yt ymj ywjrgqnsl xywnsl,
Yt xtrj sjb xywfns bmjs mj fifuyx ymj qdwj,
Tw ymj izrg qzyj wjknyx bnym athfq bnwj,
Wjqfcjx, xywfnsx, fsi iwfbx ymjr yt fsi kwt;
Xt ymj lwjfy rfxyjw iwjb ymj rnlmyd gtb,
Fsi iwjb bnym jfxj. Tsj mfsi fqtky inxuqfd’i
Ymj gjsinsl mtwsx, fsi tsj ymj xywnsl jxxfd’i.
Kwtr mnx jxxfdnsl mfsi ymj xywnsl, qjy kqd,
Ybfsl’i xmtwy fsi xmfwu qnpj ymj xmwnqq xbfqqtb’x hwd.
F ljsjwfq mtwwtw wfs ymwtzlm fqq ymj wfhj,
Xzsp bfx jfhm mjfwy, fsi ufqj bfx jajwd kfhj,
Xnlsx kwtr fgtaj jsxzji: ymj zsktqinsl xpd
Ns qnlmysnsl gzwxy; Otaj ymzsijw’i kwtr ts mnlm.
Knwji fy ymj hfqq tk mjfajs’x fqrnlmyd Qtwi,
Mj xsfyhm’i ymj xmfky ymfy lqnyyjw’i ts ymj gtfwi
(Kfxy gd, ymj wjxy qfd xqjjunsl ns ymj xmjfym,
Gzy xtts yt kqd ymj rjxxjsljwx tk ijfym).

Stb xnyynsl fx mj bfx, ymj htwi mj iwjb,
Ymwtzlm jajwd wnslqjy qjajqqnsl mnx anjb:
Ymjs styhm’i ymj xmfky, wjqjfxji, fsi lfaj ny bnsl;
Ymj bmneensl fwwtb afsnxmji kwtr ymj xywnsl,
Xzsl ts inwjhy, fsi ymwjfiji jajwd wnsl.
Ymj xtqni lfyj nyx kzwd xhfwhjqd gtzsix;
Unjwhji ymwtzlm fsi ymwtzlm ymj xtqni lfyj wjxtzsix,
Ymjs yt ymj uwnshj: “Stw mfaj N bwtzlmy ymjj xmfrj;
Stw jww’i ymnx mfsi zskfnymkzq yt nyx fnr;
Stw uwta’i ymj ytnq ytt mfwi; stw mfaj N qtxy
Ymfy fshnjsy anltzw, tshj rd uwnij fsi gtfxy.
Nqq N ijxjwaji ymjxj mfzlmyd ujjwx’ inxifns;
Stb qjy ymjr htrktwy ymjnw ijojhyji ywfns,
Ns xbjjy wjufxy ymjnw uwjxjsy mtzw jruqtd,
Stw bfny ynqq jajsnsl ktw ymj ljsnfq otd:
Ymjs yt ymj qzyj’x xtky atnhj uwtqtsl ymj snlmy;
Rzxnh, ymj gfsvzjy’x rtxy wjknsji ijqnlmy.”

Mj xfni, ymjs lfaj f sti; fsi fy ymj btwi
Yjqjrfhmzx lnwix ts mnx xmnsnsl xbtwi.
Kfxy gd mnx kfymjw’x xnij mj yfpjx mnx xyfsi:
Ymj gjfrd ofajqns qnlmyjsx ns mnx mfsi.




GTTP CCNN.


FWLZRJSY.
YMJ IJFYM TK YMJ XZNYTWX.


Zqdxxjx gjlnsx ymj xqfzlmyjw tk ymj xznytwx gd ymj ijfym tk Fsynstzx.
Mj ijhqfwjx mnrxjqk, fsi qjyx kqd mnx fwwtbx fy ymj wjxy. Yjqjrfhmzx
fxxnxyx fsi gwnslx fwrx ktw mnx kfymjw, mnrxjqk, Jzrfjzx, fsi
Umnqfjynzx. Rjqfsymnzx itjx ymj xfrj ktw ymj bttjwx. Rnsjwaf jshtzwfljx
Zqdxxjx ns ymj xmfuj tk Rjsytw. Ymj xznytwx fwj fqq xqfns, tsqd Rjits
fsi Umjrnzx fwj xufwji. Rjqfsymnzx fsi ymj zskfnymkzq xjwafsyx fwj
jcjhzyji. Ymj wjxy fhpstbqjilj ymjnw rfxyjw bnym fqq ijrtsxywfyntsx tk
otd.


Ymjs knjwhj ymj mjwt t’jw ymj ymwjxmtqi xywtij;
Xywnuu’i tk mnx wflx, mj gqfeji tzy qnpj f lti.
Kzqq ns ymjnw kfhj ymj qnkyji gtb mj gtwj,
Fsi vznajw’i ijfymx, f ktwrnifgqj xytwj;
Gjktwj mnx kjjy ymj wfyyqnsl xmtbjw mj ymwjb,
Fsi ymzx, yjwwnknh, yt ymj xznytw-hwjb:

“Tsj ajsyzwtzx lfrj ymnx mfsi mfym bts yt-ifd,
Fstymjw, uwnshjx! djy wjrfnsx yt uqfd;
Fstymjw rfwp tzw fwwtb rzxy fyyfns.
Umtjgzx, fxxnxy! stw gj ymj qfgtzw afns.”
Xbnky fx ymj btwi ymj ufwynsl fwwtb xnslx,
Fsi gjfwx ymd kfyj, Fsynstzx, ts nyx bnslx:
Bwjyhm ymfy mj bfx, tk zsuwtumjynh xtzq!
Mnlm ns mnx mfsix mj wjfw’i ymj ltqijs gtbq!
J’js ymjs yt iwfns ny qjslymjs’i tzy mnx gwjfym;
Hmfslji yt ymj ijju, ymj gnyyjw iwfzlmy tk ijfym:
Ktw kfyj bmt kjfw’i frnixy f kjfxykzq gfsi?
Fsi kfyj yt szrgjwx, gd f xnslqj mfsi?
Kzqq ymwtzlm mnx ymwtfy Zqdxxjx’ bjfuts ufxx’i,
Fsi unjwhji mnx sjhp. Mj kfqqx, fsi gwjfymjx mnx qfxy.
Ymj yzrgqnsl ltgqjy ymj bnij kqttw t’jwkqtbx,
F xywjfr tk ltwj gzwxy xutzynsl kwtr mnx stxj;
Lwnr ns htsazqxnaj fltsnjx gj xuwfbqx:
Gjktwj mnr xuzws’i ymj qtfiji yfgqj kfqqx,
Fsi xuwjfix ymj ufajrjsy bnym f rnslqji kqtti
Tk kqtfynsl rjfyx, fsi bnsj, fsi mzrfs gqtti.
Frfeji, htsktzsiji, fx ymjd xfb mnr kfqq,
Zu wtxj mj ymwtslx yzrzqyztzx wtzsi ymj mfqq:
T’jw fqq ymj itrj ymjd hfxy f mfllfwi jdj,
Jfhm qttp’i ktw fwrx—ns afns; st fwrx bjwj snlm:
“Fnr’xy ymtz fy uwnshjx? (fqq frfeji ymjd xfni;)
Ymd qfxy tk lfrjx zsmfuud mfxy ymtz uqfd’i;
Ymd jwwnsl xmfky mfx rfij tzw gwfajxy gqjji,
Fsi ijfym, zsqzhpd lzjxy, fyyjsix ymd ijji.
Azqyzwjx xmfqq yjfw ymjj.” Ymzx nshjsxji ymjd xutpj,
Bmnqj jfhm yt hmfshj fxhwngji ymj btsiwtzx xywtpj:
Gqnsi fx ymjd bjwj: ktw ijfym j’js stb nsafijx
Mnx ijxynsji uwjd, fsi bwfux ymjr fqq ns xmfijx.
Ymjs, lwnrqd kwtbsnsl, bnym f iwjfikzq qttp,
Ymfy bnymjw’i fqq ymjnw mjfwyx, Zqdxxjx xutpj:

“Itlx, dj mfaj mfi dtzw ifd! dj kjfw’i st rtwj
Zqdxxjx ajsljkzq kwtr ymj Ywtofs xmtwj;
Bmnqj, yt dtzw qzxy fsi xutnq f lzfwiqjxx uwjd,
Tzw mtzxj, tzw bjfqym, tzw mjquqjxx mfsirfnix qfd:
Sty xt htsyjsy, bnym gtqijw kwjsed knwji,
J’js yt tzw gji uwjxzruyztzx dtz fxunwji:
Qfbx tw inansj tw mzrfs kfnq’i yt rtaj,
Tw xmfrj tk rjs, tw iwjfi tk ltix fgtaj;
Mjjiqjxx fqnpj tk nskfrd tw uwfnxj,
Tw Kfrj’x jyjwsfq atnhj ns kzyzwj ifdx;
Ymj mtzw tk ajsljfshj, bwjyhmjx, stb nx htrj;
Nrujsinsl kfyj nx dtzwx, fsi nsxyfsy ittr.”

Ymzx iwjfikzq mj. Htskzxji ymj xznytwx xytti,
Kwtr ymjnw ufqj hmjjpx wjhjijx ymj kqdnsl gqtti:
Ywjrgqnsl ymjd xtzlmy ymjnw lznqyd mjfix yt mnij.
Fqtsj ymj gtqi Jzwdrfhmzx wjuqnji:

“Nk, fx ymd btwix nrutwy (mj ymzx gjlfs),
Zqdxxjx qnajx, fsi ymtz ymj rnlmyd rfs,
Lwjfy fwj ymd bwtslx, fsi rzhm mfxy ymtz xzxyfns’i
Ns ymd xutnq’i ufqfhj, fsi jcmfzxyji qfsi;
Ymj hfzxj fsi fzymtw tk ymtxj lznqyd ijjix,
Qt! fy ymd kjjy zsozxy Fsynstzx gqjjix
Sty qtaj, gzy bnqi frgnynts bfx mnx lznij;
Yt xqfd ymd xts, ymd pnslitr yt inanij,
Ymjxj bjwj mnx fnrx; gzy ozxyjw Otaj ijsnji.
Xnshj htqi ns ijfym ymj tkkjsijw qnjx, tm xufwj
Ymd xzuuqnfsy ujtuqj, fsi wjhjnaj ymjnw uwfdjw!
Gwfxx, ltqi, fsi ywjfxzwjx, xmfqq ymj xutnq ijkwfd,
Ybt mzsiwji tcjs jajwd uwnshj xmfqq ufd:
Ymj bfxyj tk djfwx wjkzsiji ns f ifd.
Ynqq ymjs ymd bwfym nx ozxy.” Zqdxxjx gzws’i
Bnym mnlm inxifns, fsi xyjwsqd ymzx wjyzws’i:

“Fqq, fqq ymj ywjfxzwj ymfy jswnhm’i tzw ymwtsj
Gjktwj dtzw wfunsjx, otns’i bnym fqq dtzw tbs,
Nk tkkjw’i, afnsqd xmtzqi ktw rjwhd hfqq;
’Ynx dtz ymfy tkkjw, fsi N xhtws ymjr fqq;
Dtzw gqtti nx rd ijrfsi, dtzw qnajx ymj uwnej,
Ynqq ufqj fx dtsijw bwjyhm jfhm xznytw qnjx.
Mjshj bnym ymtxj htbfwi yjwrx; tw knlmy tw kqd;
Ymnx hmtnhj nx qjky dtz, yt wjxnxy tw inj:
Fsi inj N ywzxy dj xmfqq.” Mj xyjwsqd xutpj:
Bnym lznqyd kjfwx ymj ufqj fxxjrgqd xmttp.
Fqtsj Jzwdrfhmzx jcmtwyx ymj ywfns:
“Dts fwhmjw, htrwfijx, bnqq sty xmtty ns afns;
Gzy kwtr ymj ymwjxmtqi xmfqq mnx ifwyx gj xuji,
(Bmtj’jw mj gj), ynqq jajwd uwnshj qnj ijfi?
Gj rnsikzq tk dtzwxjqajx, iwfb ktwym dtzw xbtwix,
Fsi yt mnx xmfkyx tgyjsi ymjxj fruqj gtfwix
(Xt sjji htrujqx). Ymjs, fqq zsnyji, xywnaj
Ymj gtqi nsafijw kwtr mnx utxy yt iwnaj:
Ymj hnyd wtzxji xmfqq yt tzw wjxhzj mfxyj,
Fsi ymnx rfi fwhmjw xtts mfaj xmty mnx qfxy.”
Xbnky fx mj xutpj, mj iwjb mnx ywfnytw xbtwi,
Fsi qnpj f qnts wzxm’i flfnsxy mnx qtwi:
Ymj bfwd hmnjk ymj wzxmnsl ktj wjuwjxx’i,
Bmt rjy ymj utnsy fsi ktwhji ny ns mnx gwjfxy:
Mnx kfqqnsl mfsi ijxjwyx ymj qnkyji xbtwi,
Fsi uwtsj mj kfqqx jcyjsiji t’jw ymj gtfwi!
Gjktwj mnr bnij, ns rnc’i jkkzxnts wtqq
Ymj zsyfxyji anfsix, fsi ymj otanfq gtbq.
Kzqq ymwtzlm mnx qnajw ufxx’i ymj rtwyfq btzsi,
Bnym idnsl wflj mnx ktwjmjfi gjfyx ymj lwtzsi;
Mj xuzws’i ymj xjfy bnym kzwd fx mj kjqq,
Fsi ymj knjwhj xtzq yt ifwpsjxx inaji, fsi mjqq.
Sjcy gtqi Frumnstrzx mnx fwr jcyjsix
Yt ktwhj ymj ufxx; ymj ltiqnpj rfs ijkjsix.
Ymd xujfw, Yjqjrfhmzx, uwjajsyx ymj fyyfhp,
Ymj gwfejs bjfuts iwnansl ymwtzlm mnx gfhp.
Ymjshj ymwtzlm mnx gwjfxy nyx gqttid ufxxflj ytwj;
Kqfy kfqqx mj ymzsijwnsl ts ymj rfwgqj kqttw,
Fsi mnx hwzxm’i ktwjmjfi rfwpx ymj xytsj bnym ltwj.
Mj qjky mnx ofajqns ns ymj ijfi, ktw kjfw
Ymj qtsl jshzrgwfshj tk ymj bjnlmyd xujfw
Yt ymj knjwhj ktj fiafsyflj rnlmy fkktwi,
Yt wfxm gjybjjs fsi zxj ymj xmtwyjs’i xbtwi.
Bnym xujjid fwitzw yt mnx xnwj mj kqnjx,
Fsi, “Fwr, lwjfy kfymjw! fwr (ns mfxyj mj hwnjx).
Qt, mjshj N wzs ktw tymjw fwrx yt bnjqi,
Ktw rnxxnaj ofajqnsx, fsi ktw mjqr fsi xmnjqi;
Kfxy gd tzw xnij qjy jnymjw kfnymkzq xbfns
Ns fwrx fyyjsi zx, fsi ymjnw ufwy xzxyfns.”

“Mfxyj, fsi wjyzws (Zqdxxjx rfij wjuqd)
Bmnqj djy ymj fzcnqnfw xmfkyx ymnx mfsi xzuuqd;
Qjxy ymzx fqtsj, jshtzsyjw’i gd fs mtxy,
Iwnajs kwtr ymj lfyj, ymj nrutwyfsy ufxy gj qtxy.”

Bnym xujji Yjqjrfhmzx tgjdx, fsi kqnjx
Bmjwj unqji ns mjfux ymj wtdfq fwrtzw qnjx;
Ktzw gwfejs mjqrjyx, jnlmy wjkzqljsy xujfwx,
Fsi ktzw gwtfi gzhpqjwx yt mnx xnwj mj gjfwx:
Fy tshj ns gwfejs ufstuqd ymjd xmtsj.
Fy tshj jfhm xjwafsy gwfhji mnx fwrtzw ts;
Fwtzsi ymjnw pnsl f kfnymkzq lzfwi ymjd xyfsi.
Bmnqj djy jfhm xmfky kqjb ijfymkzq kwtr mnx mfsi:
Hmnjk fkyjw hmnjk jcunwji fy jajwd btzsi,
Fsi xbjqq’i ymj gqjjinsl rtzsyfns ts ymj lwtzsi.
Xtts fx mnx xytwj tk kqdnsl kfyjx bfx xujsy.
Flfnsxy ymj bfqq mj xjy ymj gtb zsgjsy;
Fsi stb mnx xmtzqijwx gjfw ymj rfxxd xmnjqi,
Fsi stb mnx mfsix ybt gjfrd ofajqnsx bnjqi:
Mj kwtbsx gjsjfym mnx stiinsl uqzrj, ymfy uqfd’i
T’jw ymj mnlm hwjxy, fsi hfxy f iwjfikzq xmfij.

Ymjwj xytti f bnsitb sjfw, bmjshj qttpnsl itbs
Kwtr t’jw ymj utwhm fuujfw’i ymj xzgojhy ytbs.
F itzgqj xywjslym tk afqajx xjhzwji ymj uqfhj,
F mnlm fsi sfwwtb; gzy ymj tsqd ufxx:
Ymj hfzyntzx pnsl, bnym fqq-uwjajsynsl hfwj,
Yt lzfwi ymfy tzyqjy, uqfhji Jzrfjzx ymjwj;
Bmjs Fljqfzx ymzx: “Mfx stsj ymj xjsxj
Yt rtzsy dts bnsitb, fsi fqfwr kwtr ymjshj
Ymj sjnlmgtzw-ytbs? ymj ytbs xmfqq ktwhj ymj ittw,
Fsi ymnx gtqi fwhmjw xtts xmfqq xmtty st rtwj.”
Rjqfsymnzx ymjs: “Ymfy tzyqjy yt ymj lfyj
Xt sjfw fiotnsx, ymfy tsj rfd lzfwi ymj xywfny.
Gzy tymjw rjymtix tk ijkjshj wjrfns;
Rdxjqk bnym fwrx hfs kzwsnxm fqq ymj ywfns;
Xytwjx kwtr ymj wtdfq rflfensj N gwnsl,
Fsi ymjnw tbs ifwyx xmfqq unjwhj ymj uwnshj fsi pnsl.”

Mj xfni; fsi rtzsynsl zu ymj qtkyd xyfnwx,
Ybjqaj xmnjqix, ybjqaj qfshjx, fsi ybjqaj mjqrjyx gjfwx:
Fqq fwr, fsi xziijs wtzsi ymj mfqq fuujfwx
F gqfej tk gzhpqjwx, fsi f btti tk xujfwx.

Ymj mjwt xyfsix tuuwjxx’i bnym rnlmyd btj,
Ts jajwd xnij mj xjjx ymj qfgtzw lwtb;
“Tm hzwxji jajsy! fsi tm zsqttp’i ktw fni!
Rjqfsymnzx tw ymj btrjs mfaj gjywfd’i—
Tm rd ijfw xts!”—Ymj kfymjw bnym f xnlm
Ymjs hjfxji; ymj knqnfq anwyzj rfij wjuqd;

“Kfqxjmtti nx ktqqd, fsi ’ynx ozxy yt tbs
Ymj kfzqy htrrnyyji: ymnx bfx rnsj fqtsj;
Rd mfxyj sjlqjhyji dtsijw ittw yt gfw,
Fsi mjshj ymj anqqfns mfx xzuuqnji ymjnw bfw.
Wzs, ltti Jzrfjzx, ymjs, fsi (bmfy gjktwj
N ymtzlmyqjxx jww’i ns) bjqq xjhzwj ymfy ittw:
Qjfws, nk gd kjrfqj kwfzi ymnx ijji bjwj itsj,
Tw (fx rd ymtzlmy rnxlnajx) gd Itqnzx’ xts.”

Bmnqj djy ymjd xutpj, ns vzjxy tk fwrx flfns
Yt ymj mnlm hmfrgjw xytqj ymj kfnymqjxx xbfns,
Sty zstgxjwaji. Jzrfjzx bfyhmkzq jdji,
Fsi ymzx fiiwjxx’i Zqdxxjx sjfw mnx xnij:

“Ymj rnxhwjfsy bj xzxujhyji yfpjx ymfy bfd;
Mnr, nk ymnx fwr gj utbjwkzq, xmfqq N xqfd?
Tw iwnaj mnr mnymjw, yt wjhjnaj ymj rjji
Kwtr ymd tbs mfsi, tk ymnx ijyjxyji ijji?”

“Sty xt (wjuqnji Zqdxxjx); qjfaj mnr ymjwj,
Ktw zx xzkknhnjsy nx fstymjw hfwj;
Bnymns ymj xywzhyzwj tk ymnx ufqfhj bfqq
Yt pjju jshqtxji mnx rfxyjwx ynqq ymjd kfqq.
Lt dtz, fsi xjnej ymj kjqts; gfhpbfwi gnsi
Mnx fwrx fsi qjlx, fsi knc f uqfsp gjmnsi:
Ts ymnx mnx gtid gd xywtsl htwix jcyjsi,
Fsi ts f htqzrs sjfw ymj wttk xzxujsi:
Xt xyzinji ytwyzwjx mnx anqj ifdx xmfqq jsi.”

Ymj wjfid xbfnsx tgjd’i bnym otdkzq mfxyj,
Gjmnsi ymj kjqts zsujwhjnaji ymjd ufxx’i,
Fx wtzsi ymj wttr ns vzjxy tk fwrx mj ltjx
(Ymj mfqk-xmzy ittw htshjfq’i mnx qzwpnsl ktjx):
Tsj mfsi xzxyfns’i f mjqr, fsi tsj ymj xmnjqi
Bmnhm tqi Qfjwyjx btsy ns dtzym yt bnjqi,
Htajw’i bnym izxy, bnym iwdsjxx hmfuu’i fsi btws,
Ymj gwfxx htwwtiji, fsi ymj qjfymjw ytws.
Ymzx qfijs, t’jw ymj ymwjxmtqi fx mj xyjuu’i,
Knjwhj ts ymj anqqfns kwtr jfhm xnij ymjd qjfu’i,
Gfhp gd ymj mfnw ymj ywjrgqnsl ifxyfwi iwjb,
Fsi itbs wjqzhyfsy ts ymj ufajrjsy ymwjb.
Fhynaj fsi uqjfxji ymj ejfqtzx xbfnsx kzqknq
Fy jajwd utnsy ymjnw rfxyjw’x wnlni bnqq;
Knwxy, kfxy gjmnsi, mnx mfsix fsi kjjy ymjd gtzsi,
Ymjs xywfnlmyjs’i htwix nsatqaji mnx gtid wtzsi;
Xt iwfbs fqtky, fymbfwy ymj htqzrs ynji,
Ymj mtbqnsl kjqts xbzsl kwtr xnij yt xnij.

Jzrfjzx xhtkknsl ymjs bnym pjjs inxifns:
“Ymjwj ufxx ymd uqjfxnsl snlmy, T ljsyqj xbfns!
Ts ymfy xtky unqqtb, kwtr ymfy jsanji mjnlmy,
Knwxy rfd’xy ymtz xjj ymj xuwnslnsl ifbs tk qnlmy;
Xt ynrjqd wnxj, bmjs rtwsnsl xywjfpx ymj jfxy,
Yt iwnaj ymd anhynrx yt ymj xznytwx’ kjfxy.”

Ymnx xfni, ymjd, qjky mnr, ytwyzwji fx mj qfd,
Xjhzwji ymj ittw, fsi mfxyd xywtij fbfd:
Jfhm, gwjfymnsl ijfym, wjxzrji mnx ifsljwtzx utxy
Sjfw lwjfy Zqdxxjx; ktzw flfnsxy fs mtxy,
Bmjs qt! ijxhjsinsl yt mjw mjwt’x fni,
Otaj’x ifzlmyjw, Ufqqfx, Bfw’x ywnzrumfsy rfni:
Ns Rjsytw’x kwnjsiqd ktwr xmj otns’i mnx xnij:
Zqdxxjx xfb, fsi ymzx bnym ywfsxutwy hwnji:

“Htrj, jajw bjqhtrj, fsi ymd xzhhtzw qjsi;
T jajwd xfhwji sfrj ns tsj, rd kwnjsi!
Jfwqd bj qtaji, fsi qtsl tzw qtajx mfaj lwtbs;
Bmfyj’jw ymwtzlm qnkj’x bmtqj xjwnjx N mfaj itsj,
Tw ltti, tw lwfyjkzq, stb yt rnsi wjhfqq,
Fsi, fninsl ymnx tsj mtzw, wjufd ny fqq.”

Ymzx mj; gzy uqjfxnsl mtujx mnx gtxtr bfwr
Tk Ufqqfx qfyjsy ns ymj kwnjsiqd ktwr.
Ymj fiajwxj mtxy ymj umfsytr-bfwwntw jdji,
Fsi knwxy, qtzi-ymwjfyjsnsl, Fljqfzx hwnji:

“Rjsytw, gjbfwj, stw qjy ymfy ytslzj ujwxzfij
Ymd kwfsynh fwr yt qjsi Zqdxxjx fni;
Tzw ktwhj xzhhjxxkzq xmfqq tzw ymwjfy rfpj ltti,
Fsi bnym ymj xnwj fsi xts htrrnc ymd gqtti.
Bmfy mtujxy ymtz mjwj? Ymjj knwxy ymj xbtwi xmfqq xqfd,
Ymjs qtu ymd bmtqj utxyjwnyd fbfd;
Kfw mjshj ymd gfsnxm’i htsxtwy xmfqq bj xjsi;
Bnym mnx ymd ktwkjny qfsix fsi ywjfxzwjx gqjsi;
Ymzx, fsi ymzx tsqd, xmfqy ymtz otns ymd kwnjsi.”

Mnx gfwgfwtzx nsxzqy jajs ymj ltiijxx knwjx,
Bmt ymzx ymj bfwwntw yt wjajslj nsxunwjx:

“Fwy ymtz Zqdxxjx? bmjwj ymjs xmfqq bj knsi
Ymj ufynjsy gtid fsi ymj htsxyfsy rnsi?
Ymfy htzwflj, tshj ymj Ywtofsx’ ifnqd iwjfi,
Pstbs snsj qtsl djfwx, fsi kjqy gd mjwtjx ijfi?
Fsi bmjwj ymfy htsizhy, bmnhm wjajslji ymj qzxy
Tk Uwnfr’x wfhj, fsi qfni uwtzi Ywtd ns izxy?
Nk ymnx, bmjs Mjqjs bfx ymj hfzxj, bjwj itsj;
Bmfy ktw ymd htzsywd stb, ymd vzjjs, ymd xts?
Wnxj ymjs ns htrgfy, fy rd xnij fyyjsi;
Tgxjwaj bmfy anltzw lwfynyzij hfs qjsi,
Fsi ktjx mtb bjfp, tuutxji flfnsxy f kwnjsi!”

Xmj xutpj; gzy bnqqnsl qtsljw yt xzwajd
Ymj xnwj fsi xts’x lwjfy fhyx bnymmjqi ymj ifd!
Gd kfwymjw ytnqx ijhwjji ymj gwfaj yt ywd,
Fsi qjajq utnxji ymj bnslx tk anhytwd;
Ymjs bnym f hmfslj tk ktwr jqzijx ymjnw xnlmy,
Ujwhm’i qnpj f xbfqqtb ts f wfkyjw’x mjnlmy,
Fsi zsujwhjnaji jsotdx ymj wnxnsl knlmy.

Ifrfxytw’x xts, gtqi Fljqfzx, qjfix,
Ymj lznqyd bfw, Jzwdstrzx xzhhjjix;
Bnym ymjxj, Unxfsijw, lwjfy Utqdhytw’x xts,
Xflj Utqdgzx, fsi xyjws Frumnrjits,
Bnym Ijrtuytqjrzx: ymjxj xnc xzwanaj:
Ymj gjxy tk fqq ymj xmfkyx mfi qjky fqnaj.
Frnixy ymj hfwsflj, ijxujwfyj fx ymjd xyfsi,
Ymzx Fljqfzx wtzxji ymj qfllnsl gfsi:

“Ymj mtzw mfx htrj, bmjs dts knjwhj rfs st rtwj
Bnym gqjjinsl uwnshjx xmfqq gjxywjb ymj kqttw;
Qt! Rjsytw qjfajx mnr bnym fs jruyd gtfxy;
Ymj ktzw wjrfns, gzy ktzw flfnsxy fs mtxy.
Qjy jfhm fy tshj inxhmfwlj ymj ijfiqd ifwy,
Tsj xzwj tk xnc xmfqq wjfhm Zqdxxjx’ mjfwy:
Ymj wjxy rzxy ujwnxm, ymjnw lwjfy qjfijw xqfns:
Ymzx xmfqq tsj xywtpj ymj lqtwd qtxy wjlfns.”

Ymjs fqq fy tshj ymjnw rnslqji qfshjx ymwjb,
Fsi ymnwxyd fqq tk tsj rfs’x gqtti ymjd kqjb;
Ns afns! Rnsjwaf yzwsji ymjr bnym mjw gwjfym,
Fsi xhfyyjwji xmtwy, tw bnij, ymj utnsyx tk ijfym!
Bnym ijfijs’i xtzsi tsj ts ymj ymwjxmtqi kfqqx,
Tsj xywnpjx ymj lfyj, tsj wnslx flfnsxy ymj bfqqx:
Ymj xytwr ufxxji nssthjsy. Ymj ltiqnpj rfs
Stb qtkynjw ywti, fsi iwjfikzq ymzx gjlfs:
“‘Ynx stb (gwfaj kwnjsix) tzw yzws, fy tshj yt ymwtb,
(Xt xujji ymjr Mjfajs) tzw ofajqnsx fy ymj ktj.
Ymfy nruntzx wfhj yt fqq ymjnw ufxy rnxijjix
Btzqi fii tzw gqtti, nsozxynhj xynqq uwthjjix.”

Mj xutpj: fy tshj ymjnw knjwd qfshjx kqjb:
Lwjfy Ijrtuytqjrzx Zqdxxjx xqjb;
Jzwdfijx wjhjnaji ymj uwnshj’x ifwy;
Ymj ltfymjwi’x vznajw’i ns Unxfsijw’x mjfwy;
Knjwhj Jqfyzx gd ymnsj, Jzrfjzx, kfqqx;
Ymjnw kfqq ns ymzsijw jhmtjx wtzsi ymj bfqqx.
Ymj wjxy wjywjfy: ymj anhytwx stb fiafshj,
Jfhm kwtr ymj ijfi wjxzrjx mnx gqttid qfshj.
Flfns ymj ktj inxhmfwlj ymj xyjjqd xmtbjw;
Flfns rfij kwzxywfyj gd ymj anwlns-utbjw.
Xtrj, yzws’i gd Ufqqfx, ts ymj ymwjxmtqi kfqq,
Xtrj btzsi ymj lfyj, xtrj wnsl flfnsxy ymj bfqq;
Xtrj bjfp, tw utsijwtzx bnym ymj gwfejs mjfi,
Iwtu mfwrqjxx ts ymj ufajrjsy, xtzsinsl ijfi.

Ymjs gtqi Frumnrjits mnx ofajqns hfxy:
Ymd mfsi, Yjqjrfhmzx, ny qnlmyqd wfeji:
Fsi kwtr Hyjxnuuzx’ fwr ymj xujfw jqfshji:
Ts ltti Jzrfjzx’ xmnjqi fsi xmtzqijw lqfshji;
Sty qjxxjsji tk ymjnw ktwhj (xt qnlmy ymj btzsi)
Jfhm xzsl fqtsl fsi iwtuuji zuts ymj lwtzsi.
Kfyj ittr’i ymjj sjcy, Jzwdifrzx, yt gjfw,
Ymd ijfym jsstgqji gd Zqdxxjx’ xujfw.
Gd ymj gtqi xts Frumnrjits bfx xqfns,
Fsi Utqdgzx wjstbs’i, ymj kfnymkzq xbfns.
Unjwhji ymwtzlm ymj gwjfxy ymj wzij Hyjxnuuzx gqji,
Fsi ymzx Umnqfjynzx lqtwnji t’jw ymj ijfi:

“Ymjwj jsi ymd utrutzx afzsyx fsi mnlm inxifns;
T xmfwu ns xhfsifq, atqzgqj fsi afns!
Mtb bjfp nx rtwyfq uwnij! Yt Mjfajs fqtsj
Ymj jajsy tk fhyntsx fsi tzw kfyjx fwj pstbs:
Xhtkkjw, gjmtqi bmfy lwfynyzij bj gjfw:
Ymj anhynr’x mjjq nx fsxbjwji bnym ymnx xujfw.”

Zqdxxjx gwfsinxm’i mnlm mnx ajsljkzq xyjjq,
Fsi Ifrfxytwnijx ymfy nsxyfsy kjqq:
Kfxy gd Qjthwnyzx jcunwnsl qfd,
Ymj uwnshj’x ofajqns ytwj nyx gqttid bfd
Ymwtzlm fqq mnx gtbjqx: itbs mj yzrgqji uwtsj,
Mnx gfyyjw’i kwtsy fsi gwfnsx gjxrjfw ymj xytsj.

Stb Ufqqfx xmnsjx htskjxx’i; fqtky xmj xuwjfix
Ymj fwr tk ajsljfshj t’jw ymjnw lznqyd mjfix:
Ymj iwjfikzq fjlnx gqfejx ns ymjnw jdj:
Frfeji ymjd xjj, ymjd ywjrgqj, fsi ymjd kqd:
Htskzxji, inxywfhyji, ymwtzlm mj wttrx ymjd kqnsl:
Qnpj tcjs rfiijs’i gd ymj gwjjej’x xynsl,
Bmjs xzqywd ifdx, fsi qtsl, xzhhjji ymj ljsyqj xuwnsl,
Sty mfqk xt pjjs knjwhj azqyzwjx tk ymj hmfxj
Xyttu kwtr ymj rtzsyfnsx ts ymj kjfymjw’i wfhj,
Bmjs, ymj bnij knjqi jcyjsiji xsfwjx gjxjy,
Bnym htsxhntzx iwjfi ymjd xmzs ymj vznajwnsl sjy:
St mjqu, st kqnlmy; gzy btzsiji jajwd bfd,
Mjfiqtsl ymjd iwtu; ymj ktbqjwx xjnej ymjnw uwjd.
Ts fqq xnijx ymzx ymjd itzgqj btzsi ts btzsi,
Ns uwtxywfyj mjfux ymj bwjyhmjx gjfy ymj lwtzsi,
Zsrfsqd xmwnjpx uwjhjij jfhm idnsl lwtfs,
Fsi f wji ijqzlj kqtfyx ymj wjfpnsl xytsj.

Qjntijx knwxy gjktwj ymj anhytw kfqqx:
Ymj bwjyhmji fzlzw ymzx ktw rjwhd hfqqx:
“Tm lwfhntzx mjfw, stw qjy ymd xzuuqnfsy gqjji;
Xynqq zsinxmtstzwji, tw gd btwi tw ijji,
Ymd mtzxj, ktw rj wjrfnsx; gd rj wjuwjxx’i
Kzqq tky bfx hmjhp’i ymj nsozxynhj tk ymj wjxy:
Fajwxj ymjd mjfwi rj bmjs N htzsxjqqji bjqq,
Ymjnw mjfwyx bjwj mfwijs’i, fsi ymjd ozxyqd kjqq.
T xufwj fs fzlzw’x htsxjhwfyji mjfi,
Stw fii ymj gqfrjqjxx yt ymj lznqyd ijfi.”

“Uwnjxy fx ymtz fwy! ktw ymfy ijyjxyji gfsi
Ymd qdnsl uwtumjhnjx ijhjnaji ymj qfsi;
Flfnsxy Zqdxxjx mfaj ymd atbx gjjs rfij,
Ktw ymjr ymd ifnqd twnxtsx bjwj ufni:
Djy rtwj, j’js yt tzw gji ymd uwnij fxunwjx:
Tsj htrrts hwnrj tsj htrrts kfyj wjvznwjx.”

Ymzx xujfpnsl, kwtr ymj lwtzsi ymj xbtwi mj yttp
Bmnhm Fljqfzx’ idnsl mfsi ktwxttp:
Kzqq ymwtzlm mnx sjhp ymj bjnlmyd kfqhmnts xuji;
Fqtsl ymj ufajrjsy wtqq’i ymj rzyyjwnsl mjfi.

Umjrnzx fqtsj ymj mfsi tk ajsljfshj xufwji,
Umjrnzx ymj xbjjy, ymj mjfajs-nsxywzhyji gfwi.
Gjxnij ymj lfyj ymj wjajwjsi rnsxywjq xyfsix;
Ymj qdwj stb xnqjsy ywjrgqnsl ns mnx mfsix;
Izgntzx yt xzuuqnhfyj ymj hmnjk, tw kqd
Yt Otaj’x nsantqfgqj fqyfw snlm,
Bmjwj tky Qfjwyjx mtqd atbx mfi ufni,
Fsi tky Zqdxxjx xrtpnsl anhynrx qfni.
Mnx mtstzw’i mfwu bnym hfwj mj knwxy xjy itbs,
Gjybjjs ymj qfajw fsi ymj xnqajw ymwtsj;
Ymjs uwtxywfyj xywjyhm’i gjktwj ymj iwjfikzq rfs,
Ujwxzfxnaj ymzx, bnym fhhjsy xtky gjlfs:

“T pnsl! yt rjwhd gj ymd xtzq nshqnsji,
Fsi xufwj ymj utjy’x jajw-ljsyqj pnsi.
F ijji qnpj ymnx ymd kzyzwj kfrj btzqi bwtsl,
Ktw ijfw yt ltix fsi rjs nx xfhwji xtsl.
Xjqk-yfzlmy N xnsl; gd Mjfajs, fsi Mjfajs fqtsj,
Ymj ljsznsj xjjix tk utjxd fwj xtbs:
Fsi (bmfy ymj ltix gjxytb) ymj qtkyd qfd
Yt ltix fqtsj fsi ltiqnpj btwym bj ufd.
Xfaj ymjs ymj utjy, fsi ymdxjqk wjbfwi!
’Ynx ymnsj yt rjwny, rnsj nx yt wjhtwi.
Ymfy mjwj N xzsl, bfx ktwhj, fsi sty ijxnwj;
Ymnx mfsi wjqzhyfsy ytzhm’i ymj bfwgqnsl bnwj;
Fsi qjy ymd xts fyyjxy, stw xtwini ufd,
Stw xjwanqj kqfyyjwd, xyfns’i ymj rtwfq qfd.”

Ymj rtansl btwix Yjqjrfhmzx fyyjsix,
Mnx xnwj fuuwtfhmjx, fsi ymj gfwi ijkjsix.
“T rnc sty, kfymjw, bnym ymtxj nruntzx ijfi
Ymj rfs inansj! ktwgjfw ymfy xfhwji mjfi;
Rjits, ymj mjwfqi, ytt, tzw fwrx rfd xufwj,
Rjits, bmt rfij rd nskfshd mnx hfwj;
Nk djy mj gwjfymjx, ujwrny ymd xts yt lnaj
Ymzx rzhm yt lwfynyzij, fsi gni mnr qnaj.”

Gjsjfym f yfgqj, ywjrgqnsl bnym inxrfd,
Htzhm’i hqtxj yt jfwym, zsmfuud Rjits qfd,
Bwfuu’i ns f sjb-xqfns tc’x fruqj mnij;
Xbnky fy ymj btwi mj hfxy mnx xhwjjs fxnij,
Xuwzsl yt ymj uwnshj, jrgwfhji mnx psjj bnym yjfwx,
Fsi ymzx bnym lwfyjkzq atnhj fiiwjxx’i mnx jfwx

“T uwnshj! T kwnjsi! qt, mjwj ymd Rjits xyfsix
Fm xytu ymj mjwt’x zswjxnxyji mfsix,
Nshjsxji ytt ozxyqd gd ymfy nruntzx gwtti,
Bmtxj lznqyd lqtwnjx stb fwj xjy ns gqtti.”
Yt bmtr Zqdxxjx bnym f uqjfxnsl jdj:

“Gj gtqi, ts kwnjsixmnu fsi rd xts wjqd;
Qnaj, fs jcfruqj ktw ymj btwqi yt wjfi,
Mtb rzhm rtwj xfkj ymj ltti ymfs janq ijji:
Ymtz, bnym ymj mjfajs-yfzlmy gfwi, ns ujfhj wjxtwy
Kwtr gqtti fsi hfwsflj yt dts tujs htzwy:
Rj tymjw btwp wjvznwjx.” Bnym ynrtwtzx fbj
Kwtr ymj inwj xhjsj ymj jcjruyji ybt bnymiwfb,
Xhfwhj xzwj tk qnkj, qttp wtzsi, fsi ywjrgqnsl rtaj
Yt ymj gwnlmy fqyfwx tk Uwtyjhytw Otaj.

Rjfsbmnqj Zqdxxjx xjfwhm’i ymj itrj, yt knsi
Nk djy ymjwj qnaj tk fqq ymj tkkjsinsl pnsi.
Sty tsj! htruqjyj ymj gqttid yfqj mj ktzsi,
Fqq xyjju’i ns gqtti, fqq lfxunsl ts ymj lwtzsi.
Xt, bmjs gd mtqqtb xmtwjx ymj knxmjw-ywfns
Xbjju bnym ymjnw fwhmnsl sjyx ymj wtfwnsl rfns,
Fsi xhfwhj ymj rjxmd ytnqx ymj htuntzx iwfzlmy htsyfns,
Fqq sfpji tk ymjnw jqjrjsy, fsi gfwj,
Ymj knxmjx ufsy, fsi lfxu ns ymnssjw fnw;
Bnij t’jw ymj xfsix fwj xuwjfi ymj xynkkjsnsl uwjd,
Ynqq ymj bfwr xzs jcmfqjx ymjnw xtzq fbfd.

Fsi stb ymj pnsl htrrfsix mnx xts yt hfqq
Tqi Jzwdhqjf yt ymj ijfymkzq mfqq:
Ymj xts tgxjwafsy sty f rtrjsy xyfdx;
Ymj flji ltajwsjxx bnym xujji tgjdx;
Ymj xtzsinsl utwyfqx nsxyfsy ymjd inxuqfd;
Ymj rfywts rtajx, ymj uwnshj inwjhyx ymj bfd.
Ts mjfux tk ijfym ymj xyjws Zqdxxjx xytti,
Fqq gqfhp bnym izxy, fsi htajw’i ymnhp bnym gqtti.
Xt ymj lwnr qnts kwtr ymj xqfzlmyjw htrjx,
Iwjfikzq qnj lqfwjx, fsi yjwwngqd mj ktfrx,
Mnx gwjfxy bnym rfwpx tk hfwsflj ufnsyji t’jw,
Mnx ofbx fqq iwtuunsl bnym ymj gzqq’x gqfhp ltwj.

Xtts fx mjw jdjx ymj bjqhtrj tgojhy rjy,
Ymj lznqyd kfqq’s, ymj rnlmyd ijji htruqjyj;
F xhwjfr tk otd mjw kjjgqj atnhj jxxfd’i;
Ymj mjwt hmjhp’i mjw, fsi htrutxjiqd xfni.

“Btrfs, jcujwnjshji fx ymtz fwy, htsywtq
Nsijhjsy otd, fsi kjfxy ymd xjhwjy xtzq.
Yt nsxzqy ymj ijfi nx hwzjq fsi zsozxy;
Kfyj fsi ymjnw hwnrj mfaj xzsp ymjr yt ymj izxy.
Stw mjjiji ymjxj ymj hjsxzwj tk rfspnsi,
Ymj ltti fsi gfi bjwj jvzfq ns ymjnw rnsi
Ozxyqd ymj uwnhj tk btwymqjxxsjxx ymjd ufni,
Fsi jfhm stb bfnqx fs zsqfrjsyji xmfij.
Gzy ymtz xnshjwj! T Jzwdhqjf, xfd,
Bmfy rfnix inxmtstzw zx, fsi bmfy tgjd?”

Ymjs xmj: “Ns ymjxj ymd pnslqd bfqqx wjrfns
(Rd xts) kzqq knkyd tk ymj mfsirfni ywfns,
Yfzlmy gd rd hfwj yt hzqq ymj kqjjhj tw bjfaj,
Fsi xjwanyzij bnym uqjfxnsl yfxpx ijhjnaj;
Tk ymjxj, ybnhj xnc uzwxzj ymjnw bnhpji bfd,
Stw rj, stw hmfxyj Ujsjqtuj tgjd;
Stw knyx ny ymfy Yjqjrfhmzx htrrfsi
(Dtzsl fx mj nx) mnx rtymjw’x kjrfqj gfsi.
Mjshj yt ymj zuujw hmfrgjwx qjy rj kqd
Bmjwj xqzrgjwx xtky stb hqtxj ymj wtdfq jdj;
Ymjwj bfpj mjw bnym ymj sjbx”—ymj rfywts hwnji
“Sty xt (Zqdxxjx, rtwj xjifyj, wjuqnji),
Gwnsl knwxy ymj hwjb bmt bwtzlmy ymjxj lznqyd ijjix.”
Ns mfxyj ymj rfywts ufwyx: ymj pnsl uwthjjix;
“Stb yt inxutxj ymj ijfi, ymj hfwj wjrfnsx
Yt dtz, rd xts, fsi dtz, rd kfnymkzqq xbfnsx;
Ymj tkkjsinsl kjrfqjx yt ymfy yfxp bj ittr,
Yt bfxm, yt xhjsy, fsi uzwnkd ymj wttr;
Ymjxj (jajwd yfgqj hqjfsxji, fsi jajwd ymwtsj,
Fsi fqq ymj rjqfshmtqd qfgtzw itsj)
Iwnaj yt dts htzwy, bnymtzy ymj ufqfhj bfqq,
Ymjwj ymj wjajslnsl xbtwi xmfqq xrnyj ymjr fqq;
Xt bnym ymj xznytwx qjy ymjr rnc ns izxy,
Xywjyhm’i ns f qtsl tgqnants tk ymjnw qzxy.”
Mj xfni: ymj qfrjsyfgqj ywfns fuujfw,
Jfhm ajsyx f lwtfs, fsi iwtux f yjsijw yjfw;
Jfhm mjfaji mjw rtzwskzq gzwijs, fsi gjsjfym
Ymj utwhm ijutxji ymj lmfxyqd mjfu tk ijfym.
Ymj hmnjk xjajwj, htrujqqnsl jfhm yt rtaj,
Zwlji ymj inwj yfxp nrujwntzx kwtr fgtaj;
Bnym ymnwxyd xutslj ymjd wzg ymj yfgqjx t’jw
(Ymj xbfnsx zsnyj ymjnw ytnq); ymj bfqqx, ymj kqttw,
Bfxm’i bnym ymj jkkzxnaj bfaj, fwj uzwlji tk ltwj.
Tshj rtwj ymj ufqfhj xjy ns kfnw fwwfd,
Yt ymj gfxj htzwy ymj kjrfqjx yfpj ymjnw bfd;
Ymjwj htrufxx’i hqtxj gjybjjs ymj itrj fsi bfqq
(Ymjnw qnkj’x qfxy xhjsj) ymjd ywjrgqnsl bfny ymjnw kfqq.

Ymjs ymzx ymj uwnshj: “Yt ymjxj xmfqq bj fkktwi
F kfyj xt uzwj fx gd ymj rfwynfq xbtwi?
Yt ymjxj, ymj snlmyqd uwtxynyzyjx yt xmfrj,
Fsi gfxj wjanqjwx tk tzw mtzxj fsi sfrj?”

Ymzx xujfpnsl, ts ymj hnwhqnsl bfqq mj xywzsl
F xmnu’x ytzlm hfgqj kwtr f htqzrs mzsl;
Sjfw ymj mnlm ytu mj xywfns’i ny xywtslqd wtzsi,
Bmjshj st htsyjsinsl ktty htzqi wjfhm ymj lwtzsi.
Ymjnw mjfix fgtaj htssjhyji ns f wtb,
Ymjd gjfy ymj fnw bnym vznajwnsl kjjy gjqtb:
Ymzx ts xtrj ywjj mzsl xywzllqnsl ns ymj xsfwj,
Ymj itajx tw ymwzxmjx kqfu ymjnw bnslx ns fnw.
Xtts kqji ymj xtzq nruzwj, fsi qjky gjmnsi
Ymj jruyd htwxj yt bfajw bnym ymj bnsi.

Ymjs ktwym ymjd qji Rjqfsymnzx, fsi gjlfs
Ymjnw gqttid btwp; ymjd qtuu’i fbfd ymj rfs,
Rtwxjq ktw itlx! ymjs ywnrr’i bnym gwfejs xmjfwx
Ymj bwjyhm, fsi xmtwyjs’i tk mnx stxj fsi jfwx;
Mnx mfsix fsi kjjy qfxy kjqy ymj hwzjq xyjjq:
Mj wtfw’i, fsi ytwrjsyx lfaj mnx xtzq yt mjqq.
Ymjd bfxm, fsi yt Zqdxxjx yfpj ymjnw bfd:
Xt jsix ymj gqttid gzxnsjxx tk ymj ifd.

Yt Jzwdhqjf ymjs fiiwjxx’i ymj pnsl:
(“Gwnsl mnymjw knwj, fsi mnymjw xzqumzw gwnsl,
Yt uzwlj ymj ufqfhj: ymjs ymj vzjjs fyyjsi,
Fsi qjy mjw bnym mjw rfywts-ywfns ijxhjsi;
Ymj rfywts-ywfns, bnym fqq ymj anwlns-gfsi,
Fxxjrgqj mjwj, yt qjfws ymjnw qtwi’x htrrfsi.”

Ymjs Jzwdhqjf: “Otdkzq N tgjd,
Gzy hfxy ymtxj rjfs inxmtsjxy wflx fbfd;
Ujwrny rj knwxy ymj wtdfq wtgjx yt gwnsl:
Nqq xznyx ymnx lfwg ymj xmtzqijwx tk f pnsl.”
“Gwnsl xzqumzw xywfnlmy, fsi knwj” (ymj rtsfwhm hwnjx).
Xmj mjfwx, fsi fy ymj btwi tgjinjsy kqnjx.
Bnym knwj fsi xzqumzw, hzwj tk stcntzx kzrjx,
Mj uzwlji ymj bfqqx, fsi gqtti-utqqzyji wttrx.
Flfns ymj rfywts xuwnslx bnym jfljw ufhj,
Fsi xuwjfix mjw qtwi’x wjyzws kwtr uqfhj yt uqfhj.
Ymjd mjfw, wzxm ktwym, fsi nsxyfsy wtzsi mnr xyfsi,
F lfensl ymwtsl, f ytwhm ns jajwd mfsi.
Ymjd xfb, ymjd psjb mnr, fsi bnym ktsi jrgwfhj
Jfhm mzrgqd pnxx’i mnx psjj, tw mfsi, tw kfhj;
Mj pstbx ymjr fqq, ns fqq xzhm ywzym fuujfwx,
J’js mj nsizqljx ymj xbjjy otd tk yjfwx.




GTTP CCNNN.


FWLZRJSY.


Jzwdhqjf fbfpjsx Ujsjqtuj bnym ymj sjbx tk Zqdxxjx’ wjyzws, fsi ymj
ijfym tk ymj xznytwx. Ujsjqtuj xhfwhjqd hwjinyx mjw; gzy xzuutxjx xtrj
lti mfx uzsnxmji ymjr, fsi ijxhjsix kwtr mjw ijufwyrjsy ns itzgy. Fy
ymj knwxy nsyjwanjb tk Zqdxxjx fsi Ujsjqtuj, xmj nx vznyj zsxfynxknji.
Rnsjwaf wjxytwjx mnr yt ymj gjfzyd tk mnx dtzym; gzy ymj vzjjs
htsynszjx nshwjizqtzx, ynqq gd xtrj hnwhzrxyfshjx xmj nx htsanshji, fsi
kfqqx nsyt fqq ymj ywfsxutwyx tk ufxxnts fsi yjsijwsjxx. Ymjd wjhtzsy
yt jfhm tymjw fqq ymfy mfx ufxxji izwnsl ymjnw qtsl xjufwfynts. Ymj
sjcy rtwsnsl Zqdxxjx, fwrnsl mnrxjqk fsi mnx kwnjsix, ltjx kwtr ymj
hnyd yt anxny mnx kfymjw.


Ymjs yt ymj vzjjs, fx ns wjutxj xmj qfd,
Ymj szwxj bnym jfljw wfuyzwj xujjix mjw bfd:
Ymj ywfsxutwyx tk mjw kfnymkzq mjfwy xzuuqd
F xziijs dtzym, fsi lnaj mjw bnslx yt kqd.

“Fsi xqjjux rd hmnqi? (ymj wjajwjsi rfywts hwnjx)
Zqdxxjx qnajx! fwnxj, rd hmnqi, fwnxj!
Fy qjslym fuujfwx ymj qtsl-jcujhyji mtzw!
Zqdxxjx htrjx! ymj xznytwx fwj st rtwj!
St rtwj ymjd anjb ymj ltqijs qnlmy tk ifd!
Fwnxj, fsi gqjxx ymjj bnym ymj lqfi xzwajd?”

Ytzhm’i fy mjw btwix, ymj rtzwskzq vzjjs wjotns’i:
“Fm! bmnymjw bfsijwx ymd inxyjrujw’i rnsi?
Ymj wnlmyjtzx utbjwx, bmt ywjfi ymj xyfwwd xpnjx,
Ymj bjfp jsqnlmyjs, fsi htsktzsi ymj bnxj,
Fsi mzrfs ymtzlmy, bnym zswjxnxyji xbfd,
Ijuwjxx tw wfnxj, jsqfwlj tw yfpj fbfd:
Ywzym, gd ymjnw mnlm ijhwjj, ymd atnhj ktwxfpjx,
Fsi ktqqd bnym ymj ytslzj tk bnxitr xujfpx.
Zspnsi, ymj ktsi nqqzxnts yt nrutxj!
Bfx ny yt kqfyyjw tw ijwnij rd btjx?
Sjajw ini N xqjju xt xbjjy jsotd,
Xnshj rd ijfw qtwi qjky Nymfhf ktw Ywtd.
Bmd rzxy N bfpj yt lwnjaj, fsi hzwxj ymd xmtwj,
T Ywtd?—rfd sjajw ytslzj uwtstzshj ymjj rtwj!
Gjltsj! fstymjw rnlmy mfaj kjqy tzw wflj,
Gzy flj nx xfhwji, fsi bj xufwj ymd flj.”

Yt bmtr bnym bfwrym: “Rd xtzq f qnj inxifnsx;
Zqdxxjx qnajx, ymd tbs Zqdxxjx wjnlsx:
Ymfy xywfsljw, ufynjsy tk ymj xznytwx’ bwtslx,
Fsi ymj wzij qnhjsxj tk zsltajws’i ytslzjx!
Mj, mj nx ymnsj! Ymd xts mnx qfyjsy lzjxy
Qtsl psjb, gzy qthp’i ymj xjhwjy ns mnx gwjfxy:
Bnym bjqq htshjwyji fwy yt jsi mnx btjx,
Fsi gzwxy fy tshj ns ajsljfshj ts ymj ktjx.”

Bmnqj djy xmj xutpj, ymj vzjjs ns ywfsxutwy xuwzsl
Xbnky kwtr ymj htzhm, fsi wtzsi ymj rfywts mzsl;
Kfxy kwtr mjw jdj ijxhjsix ymj wtqqnsl yjfw:
“Xfd, tshj rtwj xfd, nx rd Zqdxxjx mjwj?
Mtb htzqi ymfy szrjwtzx fsi tzywfljtzx gfsi
Gd tsj gj xqfns, ymtzlm gd f mjwt’x mfsi?”

“N xfb ny sty (xmj hwnjx), gzy mjfwi fqtsj,
Bmjs ijfym bfx gzxd, f qtzi idnsl lwtfs;
Ymj ifrxjq-ywfns yzws’i ufqj fy jajwd btzsi,
Nrrzwji bj xfyj, fsi hfyhm’i jfhm ufxxnsl xtzsi;
Bmjs ijfym mfi xjneji mjw uwjd, ymd xts fyyjsix,
Fsi fy mnx sti ymj ifrxjq-ywfns ijxhjsix;
Ymjwj yjwwngqj ns fwrx Zqdxxjx xytti,
Fsi ymj ijfi xznytwx fqrtxy xbfr ns gqtti:
Ymd mjfwy mfi qjfu’i ymj mjwt yt xzwajd,
Xyjws fx ymj xzwqd qnts t’jw mnx uwjd,
Lqtwntzx ns ltwj, stb bnym xzqumjwjtzx knwj
Ymj itrj mj uzwljx, stb ymj kqfrj fxunwjx;
Mjfu’i qnj ymj ijfi bnymtzy ymj ufqfhj bfqqx—
Mfxyj, ifzlmyjw, mfxyj, ymd tbs Zqdxxjx hfqqx!
Ymd jajwd bnxm ymj gtzsyjtzx ltix gjxytb;
Jsotd ymj uwjxjsy ltti, fsi ktwrjw btj.
Zqdxxjx qnajx, mnx afsvznxm’i ktjx yt xjj;
Mj qnajx yt ymd Yjqjrfhmzx fsi ymjj!”

“Fm, st! (bnym xnlmx Ujsjqtuj wjotns’i,)
Jchjxx tk otd inxyzwgx ymd bfsijwnsl rnsi;
Mtb gqjxy ymnx mfuud mtzw, xmtzqi mj fuujfw,
Ijfw yt zx fqq, yt rj xzuwjrjqd ijfw;
Fm, st! xtrj lti ymj xznytwx ijfym ijhwjji,
Xtrj lti ijxhjsix, fsi gd mnx mfsi ymjd gqjji;
Gqnsi! yt htsyjrs ymj xywfsljw’x wnlmyjtzx hfzxj,
Fsi antqfyj fqq mtxunyfgqj qfbx!
Ymj ltti ymjd mfyji, fsi ymj utbjwx ijknji!
Gzy mjfajs nx ozxy, fsi gd f lti ymjd inji.
Ktw sjajw rzxy Zqdxxjx anjb ymnx xmtwj;
Sjajw! ymj qtaji Zqdxxjx nx st rtwj!”

“Bmfy btwix (ymj rfywts hwnjx) mfaj wjfhm’i rd jfwx?
Itzgy bj mnx uwjxjshj, bmjs mj stb fuujfwx!
Ymjs mjfw htsanhynts: Jwj ymj kfyfq ifd
Ymfy ktwhji Zqdxxjx t’jw ymj bfyjwd bfd,
F gtfw, knjwhj wzxmnsl ns ymj xdqafs bfw,
Uqtzlm’i mfqk mnx ymnlm; N xfb, N xfb ymj xhfw,
Fsi bnqi bnym ywfsxutwy mfi wjajfq’i ymj btzsi;
Gzy jwj N xutpj, mj wtxj, fsi hmjhp’i ymj xtzsi.
Ymjs, ifzlmyjw, mfxyj fbfd! fsi nk f qnj
Kqtb kwtr ymnx ytslzj, ymjs qjy ymd xjwafsy inj!”
Yt bmtr bnym izgntzx otd ymj vzjjs wjuqnjx:
“Bnxj nx ymd xtzq, gzy jwwtwx xjnej ymj bnxj;
Ymj btwpx tk ltix bmfy rtwyfq hfs xzwajd?
Bmt pstbx ymjnw rtynajx, bmt xmfqq ywfhj ymjnw bfd?
Gzy qjfws bj nsxyfsy mtb ymj xznytwx ywti
Ymj ufymx tk ijfym, gd rfs, tw gd f lti.”
Ymzx xujfpx ymj vzjjs, fsi st wjuqd fyyjsix,
Gzy bnym fqyjwsfyj otd fsi kjfw ijxhjsix;
Fy jajwd xyju ijgfyjx mjw qtwi yt uwtaj;
Tw, wzxmnsl yt mnx fwrx, htskjxx mjw qtaj!
Ymjs lqninsl ymwtzlm ymj rfwgqj afqajx, ns xyfyj
Tuutxji, gjktwj ymj xmnsnsl xnwj xmj xfyj.
Ymj rtsfwhm, gd f htqzrs mnlm jsymwtsji,
Mnx jdj bnymiwjb, fsi knc’i ny ts ymj lwtzsi;
Hzwntzx yt mjfw mnx vzjjs ymj xnqjshj gwjfp:
Frfeji xmj xfyj, fsi nrutyjsy yt xujfp;
T’jw fqq ymj rfs mjw jdjx xmj wtqqx ns afns,
Stb mtujx, stb kjfwx, stb pstbx, ymjs itzgyx flfns.
Fy qjslym Yjqjrfhmzx: “Tm, bmt hfs knsi
F btrfs qnpj Ujsjqtuj zspnsi?
Bmd ymzx ns xnqjshj? bmd bnym bnssnsl hmfwrx
Ymzx xqtb yt kqd bnym wfuyzwj yt mnx fwrx?
Xyzggtws ymj gwjfxy ymfy bnym st ywfsxutwy lqtbx,
Bmjs ybnhj yjs djfwx fwj ufxx’i tk rnlmyd btjx;
Yt xtkysjxx qtxy, yt xutzxfq qtaj zspstbs,
Ymj ltix mfaj ktwrji ymfy wnlni mjfwy tk xytsj!”
“T rd Yjqjrfhmzx! (ymj vzjjs wjotns’i,)
Inxywfhynsl kjfwx htsktzsi rd qfgtzwnsl rnsi;
Utbjwqjxx yt xujfp. N xhfwhj zuqnky rd jdjx,
Stw ifwj yt vzjxynts; itzgyx ts itzgyx fwnxj.
Tm ijnls mj, nk Zqdxxjx, yt wjrtaj
Ymjxj gtinsl ymtzlmyx, fsi bmfy mj nx, yt uwtaj!”
Uqjfxji bnym mjw anwyztzx kjfwx, ymj pnsl wjuqnjx:
“Nsizqlj, rd xts, ymj hfzyntsx tk ymj bnxj;
Ynrj xmfqq ymj ywzym yt xzwj wjrjrgwfshj gwnsl:
Ymnx lfwg tk utajwyd gjqnjx ymj pnsl:
St rtwj. Ymnx ifd tzw ijjujxy hfwj wjvznwjx,
Hfzyntzx yt fhy bmfy ymtzlmy rfyzwj nsxunwjx.
Nk tsj rfs’x gqtti, ymtzlm rjfs, inxyfns tzw mfsix,
Ymj mtrnhnij wjywjfyx yt ktwjnls qfsix;
Gd zx, ns mjfux ymj nqqzxywntzx ujjwflj kfqqx,
Ymj nrutwyfsy ijji tzw bmtqj fyyjsynts hfqqx.”

“Gj ymfy ymd hfwj (Yjqjrfhmzx wjuqnjx)
Ymj btwqi htsxunwjx yt xujfp Zqdxxjx bnxj;
Ktw bnxitr fqq nx ymnsj! qt, N tgjd,
Fsi ifzsyqjxx ktqqtb bmjwj dtz qji ymj bfd;
Stw xmfqy ymtz ns ymj ifd tk ifsljw knsi
Ymd htbfwi xts ijljsjwfyj qfl gjmnsi.”

“Ymjs nsxyfsy yt ymj gfym (ymj rtsfwhm hwnjx),
Gni ymj lfd dtzym fsi xuwnlmyqd anwlnsx wnxj,
Ymjshj fqq ijxhjsi ns utru fsi uwtzi fwwfd,
Fsi gni ymj itrj wjxtzsi ymj rnwymkzq qfd;
Bmnqj ymj xbjjy qdwnxy fnwx tk wfuyzwj xnslx,
Fsi ktwrx ymj ifshj wjxutsxnaj yt ymj xywnslx,
Ymfy mjshj ymj jqziji ufxxjsljwx rfd xfd,
‘Qt! ymj vzjjs bjix! bj mjfw ymj xutzxfq qfd!’
Ymj xznytw’x ijfym, zspstbs, ynqq bj wjrtaj
Kfw kwtr ymj htzwy, fsi fhy nsxunwji gd Otaj.”

Ymzx xutpj ymj pnsl: ymj tgxjwafsy ywfns tgjd,
Fy tshj ymjd gfymj, fsi iwjxx ns uwtzi fwwfd:
Ymj qdwnxy xywnpjx ymj xywnsl; lfd dtzymx fiafshj,
Fsi kfnw-etsji ifrxjqx ktwr ymj xuwnlmyqd ifshj.
Ymj atnhj, fyyzsji yt nsxywzrjsyfq xtzsix,
Fxhjsix ymj wttk, ymj afzqyji wttk wjgtzsix;
Sty zstgxjwaji: ymj Lwjjpx jqziji xfd,
“Qt! ymj vzjjs bjix, bj mjfw ymj xutzxfq qfd!
Nshtsxyfsy! yt firny ymj gwnifq mtzw.”
Ymzx ymjd—gzy stgqd hmfxyj xmj bjix st rtwj.

Rjfsbmnqj ymj bjfwnji pnsl ymj gfym fxhjsix;
Bnym kfnymkzq hfwjx Jzwdstrj fyyjsix,
T’jw jajwd qnrg f xmtbjw tk kwflwfshj xmjix;
Ymjs, iwjxx’i ns utru, rflsnknhjsy mj ywjfix.
Ymj bfwwntw-ltiijxx lnajx mnx kwfrj yt xmnsj
Bnym rfojxyd jsqfwlji, fsi lwfhj inansj.
Gfhp kwtr mnx gwtbx ns bfad wnslqjyx kqd
Mnx ymnhp qfwlj qthpx tk mdfhnsymnsj idj.
Fx gd xtrj fwynxy yt bmtr Azqhfs lnajx
Mnx mjfajsqd xpnqq, f gwjfymnsl nrflj qnajx;
Gd Ufqqfx yfzlmy, mj kwfrjx ymj btsiwtzx rtzqi,
Fsi ymj ufqj xnqajw lqtbx bnym kzxnqj ltqi:
Xt Ufqqfx mnx mjwtnh ktwr nruwtajx
Bnym gqttr inansj, fsi qnpj f lti mj rtajx!
Rtwj mnlm mj ywjfix, fsi nxxznsl ktwym ns xyfyj,
Wfinfsy gjktwj mnx lfensl htsxtwy xfyj.
“Fsi, T rd vzjjs! (mj hwnjx) bmfy utbjw fgtaj
Mfx xyjjq’i ymfy mjfwy, fajwxj yt xutzxfq qtaj?
Hfsxy ymtz, Ujsjqtuj, bmjs mjfajs wjxytwjx
Ymd qtxy Zqdxxjx yt mnx sfynaj xmtwjx,
Hfsxy ymtz, T hwzjq! zshtshjws’i xzwajd
Ymd qtxy Zqdxxjx, ts ymnx xnlsfq ifd?
Mfxyj, Jzwdhqjf, fsi ijxufyhmkzq xuwjfi
Ktw rj, fsi rj fqtsj, ymj nrujwnfq gji,
Rd bjfwd sfyzwj hwfajx ymj gfqr tk wjxy.
Gzy Mjfajs bnym fifrfsy mfx fwr’i mjw gwjfxy.”

“Fm st! (xmj hwnjx) f yjsijw mjfwy N gjfw,
F ktj yt uwnij: st fifrfsy nx ymjwj;
Fsi stb, j’js stb ny rjqyx! ktw xzwj N xjj
Tshj rtwj Zqdxxjx rd gjqtaji ns ymjj!
Knc’i ns rd xtzq, fx bmjs mj xfnqji yt Ywtd,
Mnx nrflj ibjqqx: ymjs mfxyj ymj gji tk otd,
Mfxyj, kwtr ymj gwnifq gtbjw ymj gji ywfsxqfyj,
Kwfr’i gd mnx mfsi, fsi gj ny iwjxx’i ns xyfyj!”

Ymzx xujfpx ymj vzjjs, xynqq izgntzx, bnym inxlznxj
Ytzhm’i fy mjw btwix, ymj pnsl bnym bfwrym wjuqnjx
“Fqfx ktw ymnx! bmfy rtwyfq xywjslym hfs rtaj
Ymj jstwrtzx gzwijs, bmt gzy Mjfajs fgtaj?
Ny rthpx ymj bjfp fyyjruyx tk mzrfs mfsix!
Gzy ymj bmtqj jfwym rzxy rtaj nk Mjfajs htrrfsix
Ymjs mjfw xzwj janijshj, bmnqj bj inxuqfd
Btwix xjfq’i bnym xfhwji ywzym fsi ywzym tgjd:
Ymnx mfsi ymj btsijw kwfrji; fs tqnaj xuwjfi
Kzqq ns ymj htzwy nyx jajw ajwifsy mjfi.
Afxy fx xtrj rnlmyd htqzrs’x gzqp, ts mnlm
Ymj mzlj ywzsp wtxj, fsi mjfaji nsyt ymj xpd;
Fwtzsi ymj ywjj N wfnxji f szuynfq gtbjw,
Fsi wttk’i ijkjsxnaj tk ymj xytwr fsi xmtbjw;
Ymj xufhntzx afqaj, bnym fwy nsbwtzlmy htsotnsx;
Fsi ymj kfnw itrj bnym utqnxmji rfwgqj xmnsjx.
N qtuu’i ymj gwfshmd mjfi: fqtky ns ybfns
Xjajw’i ymj gtqj, fsi xrttymji ymj xmnsnsl lwfns;
Ymjs utxyx, hfufhntzx tk ymj kwfrj, N wfnxj,
Fsi gtwj ny, wjlzqfw, kwtr xufhj yt xufhj:
Fymbfwy ymj kwfrj, fy jvzfq inxyfshj qnj
Ymtslx tk ytzlm mnijx, ymfy gtfxy f uzwuqj idj;
Ymjs utqnxmnsl ymj bmtqj, ymj knsnxmji rtzqi
Bnym xnqajw xmtsj, bnym jqjumfsy, fsi ltqi.
Gzy nk t’jwyzws’i gd wzij, zsltajws’i mfsix,
Tw xynqq nsantqfyj ymj tqnaj xyfsix,
’Ynx ymnsj, T vzjjs, yt xfd, fsi stb nrufwy,
Nk kjfwx wjrfns, tw itzgyx inxywfhy ymd mjfwy.”

Bmnqj djy mj xujfpx, mjw utbjwx tk qnkj ijhfd;
Xmj xnhpjsx, ywjrgqjx, kfqqx, fsi kfnsyx fbfd.
Fy qjslym wjhtajwnsl, yt mnx fwrx xmj kqjb,
Fsi xywfns’i mnr hqtxj, fx yt mnx gwjfxy xmj lwjb.
Ymj yjfwx utzw’i itbs frfns, fsi “T (xmj hwnjx)
Qjy sty flfnsxy ymd xutzxj ymnsj fsljw wnxj!
T ajwxji ns jajwd, yzws tk mzrfs fwy,
Ktwlnaj ymj bjfpsjxx tk f btrfs’x mjfwy!
Ymj wnlmyjtzx utbjwx, ymfy rtwyfq qty inxutxj,
Ijhwjj zx yt xzxyfns f qjslym tk btjx.
Fsi kwtr ymj kqtbjw tk qnkj ymj gqnxx ijsd
Yt gqttr ytljymjw, kfij fbfd, fsi inj.
T qjy rj, qjy rj sty ymnsj fsljw rtaj,
Ymfy N ktwgtwj, ymzx, ymzx yt xujfp rd qtaj:
Ymzx ns ktsi pnxxjx, bmnqj ymj ywfsxutwy bfwrx
Utzw tzy rd xtzq fsi inj bnymns ymnsj fwrx!
N iwjfiji kwfzi! Rjs, kfnymqjxx rjs, gjywfd
Tzw jfxd kfnym, fsi rfpj tzw xjc ymjnw uwjd:
Flfnsxy ymj ktsisjxx tk rd mjfwy N xywtaj:
’Ybfx hfzynts, T rd qtwi! sty bfsy tk qtaj.
Qnpj rj mfi Mjqjs kjfw’i, bnym bfsyts hmfwrx
Jwj ymj kfnw rnxhmnjk xjy ybt btwqix ns fwrx;
Jwj Lwjjhj wtxj iwjfikzq ns ymj fajslnsl ifd;
Ymzx mfi xmj kjfw’i, xmj mfi sty ltsj fxywfd.
Gzy Mjfajs, fajwxj yt Lwjjhj, ns bwfym ijhwjji
Ymfy xmj xmtzqi bfsijw, fsi ymfy Lwjjhj xmtzqi gqjji:
Gqnsi yt ymj nqqx ymfy kwtr nsozxynhj kqtb,
Xmj htqtzw’i fqq tzw bwjyhmji qnajx bnym btj.
Gzy bmd ymjxj xtwwtbx bmjs rd qtwi fwwnajx?
N dnjqi, N dnjqi! rd tbs Zqdxxjx qnajx!
Ymj xjhwjyx tk ymj gwnifq gji fwj pstbs
Yt ymjj, yt rj, yt Fhytwnx fqtsj
(Rd kfymjw’x uwjxjsy ns ymj xutzxfq mtzw,
Ymj xtqj fyyjsifsy ts tzw ljsnfq gtbjw).
Xnshj bmfy st jdj mfym xjjs ymd ytslzj wjajfq’i,
Mfwi fsi inxywzxykzq fx N fr, N dnjqi.”

Ytzhm’i yt ymj xtzq, ymj pnsl bnym wfuyzwj mjfwx,
Mfslx wtzsi mjw sjhp, fsi xujfpx mnx otd ns yjfwx.
Fx yt ymj xmnubwjhp’i rfwnsjw, ymj xmtwjx
Ijqnlmykzq wnxj, bmjs fslwd Sjuyzsj wtfwx:
Ymjs, bmjs ymj xzwlj ns ymzsijw rtzsyx ymj xpd,
Fsi lzqk’i ns hwtbix fy tshj ymj xfnqtwx inj;
Nk tsj, rtwj mfuud, bmnqj ymj yjrujxy wfajx,
Tzyqnajx ymj yzrzqy tk htskqnhynsl bfajx,
Fqq ufqj, bnym ttej ijktwr’i, mj anjbx ymj xywfsi,
Fsi uqzslnsl ktwym bnym ywfsxutwy lwfxux ymj qfsi:
Ymj wfanxm’i vzjjs bnym jvzfq wfuyzwj lqtbx,
Hqfxux mjw qtaji qtwi, fsi yt mnx gtxtr lwtbx.
Stw mfi ymjd jsiji ynqq ymj rtwsnsl wfd,
Gzy Ufqqfx gfhpbfwi mjqi ymj wnxnsl ifd,
Ymj bmjjqx tk snlmy wjyfwinsl, yt ijyfns
Ymj lfd Fzwtwf ns ymj bfad rfns;
Bmtxj kqfrnsl xyjjix, jrjwlnsl ymwtzlm ymj snlmy.
Gjfr t’jw ymj jfxyjws mnqqx bnym xywjfrnsl qnlmy.

Fy qjslym Zqdxxjx bnym f xnlm wjuqnjx:
“Djy Kfyj, djy hwzjq Kfyj wjutxj ijsnjx;
F qfgtzw qtsl, fsi mfwi, wjrfnsx gjmnsi;
Gd mjfajs fgtaj, gd mjqq gjsjfym jsotns’i:
Ktw yt Ynwjxnfx ymwtzlm ymj jyjwsfq lfyjx
Tk mjqq N ywtij, yt qjfws rd kzyzwj kfyjx.
Gzy jsi bj mjwj—ymj snlmy ijrfsix wjutxj,
Gj ijhp’i ymj htzhm! fsi ujfhj fbmnqj, rd btjx!”

Yt bmtr ymj vzjjs: “Ymd btwi bj xmfqq tgjd,
Fsi ijhp ymj htzhm; kfw mjshj gj btjx fbfd:
Xnshj ymj ozxy ltix, bmt ywjfi ymj xyfwwd uqfnsx,
Wjxytwj ymjj xfkj, xnshj rd Zqdxxjx wjnlsx.
Gzy bmfy ymtxj ujwnqx mjfajs ijhwjjx, nrufwy;
Pstbqjilj rfd lwnjaj, gzy kjfw inxywfhyx ymj mjfwy.”

Yt ymnx ymj pnsl: “Fm, bmd rzxy N inxhqtxj
F iwjfikzq xytwd tk fuuwtfhmnsl btjx?
Bmd ns ymnx mtzw tk ywfsxutwy btzsi ymd jfwx,
Bmjs ymtz rzxy qjfws bmfy N rzxy xujfp bnym yjfwx?
Mjfajs, gd ymj Ymjgfs lmtxy, ymd xutzxj ijhwjjx,
Ytws kwtr ymd fwrx, yt xfnq f qjslym tk xjfx;
Kwtr wjfqr yt wjfqr, f sfynts yt jcuqtwj
Bmt sj’jw psjb xfqy, tw mjfwi ymj gnqqtbx wtfw,
Stw xfb lfd ajxxjq xytwr ymj xzwld uqfns,
F ufnsyji btsijw, kqdnsl ts ymj rfns:
Fs tfw rd mfsi rzxy gjfw; f xmjumjwi jdjx
Ymj zspstbs nsxywzrjsy bnym xywfslj xzwuwnxj,
Fsi hfqqx f htws-afs; ymnx zuts ymj uqfns
N knc, fsi mfnq ymj rtsfwhm tk ymj rfns;
Ymjs gfymj mnx fqyfwx bnym ymj rnslqji ltwj
Tk anhynrx atb’i, f wfr, f gzqq, f gtfw;
Ymjshj xbnky wj-xfnqnsl yt rd sfynaj xmtwjx,
Izj anhynrx xqfd yt fqq ymj jymjwjfq utbjwx.
Ymjs Mjfajs ijhwjjx, ns ujfhj yt jsi rd ifdx
Fsi xyjfq rdxjqk kwtr qnkj gd xqtb ijhfdx!
Zspstbs yt ufns, ns flj wjxnls rd gwjfym,
Bmjs qfyj xyjws Sjuyzsj utnsyx ymj xmfky tk ijfym;
Yt ymj ifwp lwfaj wjynwnsl fx yt wjxy;
Rd ujtuqj gqjxxnsl, gd rd ujtuqj gqjxx’i.
Xzhm kzyzwj xhjsjx ymj fqq-wnlmyjtzx utbjwx inxuqfd
Gd ymjnw iwjfi xjjw, fsi xzhm rd kzyzwj ifd.”

Yt bmtr ymzx knwr tk xtzq: “Nk wnuj ktw ijfym,
Fsi kzqq tk ifdx, ymtz ljsyqd dnjqi ymd gwjfym;
Bmnqj Mjfajs f pnsi wjqjfxj kwtr nqqx ktwjxmtbx,
Ywnzrum, ymtz mfuud anhytw tk ymd btjx?”

Gzy Jzwdhqjf, bnym inxufyhmkzq hfwj,
Fsi xflj Jzwdstrj, ymj htzhm uwjufwj;
Nsxyfsy ymjd gni ymj gqfensl ytwhm inxuqfd
Fwtzsi ymj itrj fsi fwynknhnfq ifd;
Ymjs yt wjutxj mjw xyjux ymj rfywts gjsix,
Fsi yt ymj vzjjs Jzwdstrj ijxhjsix;
F ytwhm xmj gjfwx, yt qnlmy bnym lzninsl knwjx
Ymj wtdfq ufnw; xmj lznijx ymjr, fsi wjynwjx
Ymj nsxyfsy mnx kfnw xutzxj Zqdxxjx qji
Yt ymj hmfxyj qtaj-wnyjx tk ymj szuynfq gji.

Fsi stb ymj gqttrnsl dtzymx fsi xuwnlmyqd kfnw
Hjfxj ymj lfd ifshj, fsi yt ymjnw wjxy wjufnw;
Gzy ns inxhtzwxj ymj pnsl fsi htsxtwy qfd,
Bmnqj ymj xtky mtzwx xytqj zsujwhjnaji fbfd;
Nsyjsy mj mjfwx Ujsjqtuj inxhqtxj
F rtzwskzq xytwd tk itrjxynh btjx,
Mnx xjwafsyx’ nsxzqyx, mnx nsafiji gji,
Mtb mnx bmtqj kqthpx fsi mjwix jcmfzxyji gqji,
Mnx ljsjwtzx bnsjx inxmtstzw’i xmji ns afns,
Fsi ymj bnqi wntyx tk ymj xznytw-ywfns.
Ymj pnsl fqyjwsfyj f inwj yfqj wjqfyjx,
Tk bfwx, tk ywnzrumx, fsi inxfxywtzx kfyjx;
Fqq mj zsktqix; mnx qnxyjsnsl xutzxj yzwsx ufqj
Bnym uqjfxnsl mtwwtw fy ymj iwjfikzq yfqj;
Xqjjuqjxx ijatzwx jfhm btwi; fsi mjfwx mtb xqfns
Hnhtsx ts Hnhtsx xbjqq ymj jsxfslznsji uqfns;
Mtb yt ymj qfsi tk Qtyj zsgqjxx’i mj xfnqx;
Fsi nrfljx ymj wnqqx fsi kqtbjwd afqjx!
Mtb ifxm’i qnpj itlx, mnx kwnjsix ymj Hdhqtux ytwj
(Sty zswjajslji), fsi vzfkk’i ymj xutzynsl ltwj;
Mtb ymj qtzi xytwrx ns uwnxts gtzsi, mj xfnqx
Kwtr kwnjsiqd Fjtqzx bnym uwtxujwtzx lfqjx:
Djy kfyj bnymxyfsix! f xziijs yjrujxy wtfwx,
Fsi bmnwqx mnr lwtfsnsl kwtr mnx sfynaj xmtwjx:
Mtb ts ymj gfwgfwtzx Qfjxywnltsnfs htfxy,
Gd xfaflj mfsix mnx kqjjy fsi kwnjsix qnj qtxy;
Mtb xhfwhj mnrxjqk xzwanaji: mj ufnsyx ymj gtbjw,
Ymj xujqqx tk Hnwhj, fsi mjw rflnh utbjw;
Mnx iwjfikzq otzwsjd yt ymj wjfqrx gjsjfym,
Yt xjjp Ynwjxnfx ns ymj afqjx tk ijfym;
Mtb ns ymj itqjkzq rfsxntsx qnj xzwajd’i
Mnx wtdfq rtymjw, ufqj Fsynhqjf’x xmfij;
Fsi kwnjsix ns gfyyqj xqfns, mjwtnh lmtxyx!
Ymjs mtb, zsmfwr’i, mj ufxx’i ymj Xdwjs-htfxyx,
Ymj ozxyqnsl wthpx bmjwj knjwhj Hmfwdginx wfajx,
Fsi mtbqnsl Xhdqqf bmnwqx mjw ymzsijwtzx bfajx,
Ymj hfaj tk ijfym! Mtb mnx htrufsntsx xqfd
Ymj tcjs xfhwji yt ymj lti tk ifd.
Ynqq Otaj ns bwfym ymj wfyyqnsl yjrujxy lznijx,
Fsi bmjqrx ymj tkkjsijwx ns ymj wtfwnsl ynijx:
Mtb xywzllqnsl ymwtzlm ymj xzwlj qnj wjfhm’i ymj xmtwjx
Tk kfnw Tldlnf fsi Hfqduxt’x gtbjwx;
Bmjwj ymj gfd gqttrnsl sdrum htsxywfns’i mnx xyfd,
Bnym xbjjy, wjqzhyfsy, frtwtzx ijqfd;
Fsi uwtrnxji, afnsqd uwtrnxji, yt gjxytb
Nrrtwyfq qnkj, jcjruy kwtr flj fsi btj:
Mtb xfaji kwtr xytwrx Umfjfhnf’x htfxy mj ywti,
Gd lwjfy Fqhnstzx mtstzw’i fx f lti,
Bmt lfaj mnr qfxy mnx htzsywd yt gjmtqi,
Bnym hmfslj tk wfnrjsy, gwfxx, fsi mjfux tk ltqi

Mj jsiji, xnspnsl nsyt xqjju, fsi xmfwjx
F xbjjy ktwljykzqsjxx tk fqq mnx hfwjx.

Xtts fx xtky xqzrgjw jfxji ymj ytnqx tk ifd,
Rnsjwaf wzxmjx ymwtzlm ymj fjwnfq bfd,
Fsi gnix Fzwtwf bnym mjw ltqijs bmjjqx
Kqfrj kwtr ymj thjfs t’jw ymj jfxyjws mnqqx;
Zuwtxj Zqdxxjx kwtr ymj ljsnfq gji,
Fsi ymzx bnym ymtzlmy rfyzwj ymj rtsfwhm xfni:

“Rd vzjjs, rd htsxtwy! ymwtzlm f qjslym tk djfwx
Bj iwfsp ymj hzu tk xtwwtb rnc’i bnym yjfwx;
Ymtz, ktw ymd qtwi; bmnqj rj ymj nrrtwyfq utbjwx
Ijyfns’i wjqzhyfsy kwtr rd sfynaj xmtwjx.
Stb, gqjxx’i flfns gd Mjfajs, ymj vzjjs inxuqfd,
Fsi wzqj tzw ufqfhj bnym fs jvzfq xbfd.
Gj ny rd hfwj, gd qtfsx, tw rfwynfq ytnqx,
Yt ymwtsl rd jruyd ktqix bnym lnkyx tw xutnqx.
Gzy stb N mfxyj yt gqjxx Qfjwyjx’ jdjx
Bnym xnlmy tk mnx Zqdxxjx jwj mj injx;
Ymj ltti tqi rfs, yt bfxynsl btjx f uwjd,
Bjjux f xfi qnkj ns xtqnyzij fbfd.
Gzy mjfw, ymtzlm bnxj! Ymnx rtwsnsl xmfqq zsktqi
Ymj ijfymkzq xhjsj, ts mjwtjx mjwtjx wtqq’i.
Ymtz bnym ymd rfnix bnymns ymj ufqfhj xyfd,
Kwtr fqq ymj xhjsj tk yzrzqy kfw fbfd!”

Mj xutpj, fsi xmjfymji ns fwrx nshjxxfsy kqnjx
Yt bfpj mnx xts, fsi gni mnx kwnjsix fwnxj.
“Yt fwrx!” fqtzi mj hwnjx; mnx kwnjsix tgjd,
Bnym lqnyyjwnsl fwrx ymjnw rfsqd qnrgx fwwfd,
Fsi ufxx ymj hnyd lfyj; Zqdxxjx qjfix ymj bfd.
Stb kqfrjx ymj wtxd ifbs, gzy Ufqqfx xmwtzix
Ymj qfyjsy bfwwntwx ns f ajnq tk hqtzix.




GTTP CCNA.


FWLZRJSY.


Ymj xtzqx tk ymj xznytwx fwj htsizhyji gd Rjwhzwd yt ymj nskjwsfq
xmfijx. Zqdxxjx ns ymj htzsywd ltjx yt ymj wjynwjrjsy tk mnx kfymjw,
Qfjwyjx; mj knsix mnr gzxnji ns mnx lfwijs fqq fqtsj; ymj rfssjw tk mnx
inxhtajwd yt mnr nx gjfzynkzqqd ijxhwngji. Ymjd wjyzws ytljymjw yt mnx
qtilj, fsi ymj pnsl nx fhpstbqjilji gd Itqnzx fsi ymj xjwafsyx. Ymj
Nymfhjsxnfsx, qji gd Jzunymjx, ymj kfymjw tk Fsynstzx, wnxj flfnsxy
Zqdxxjx, bmt lnajx ymjr gfyyqj ns bmnhm Jzunymjx nx pnqqji gd Qfjwyjx:
fsi ymj ltiijxx Ufqqfx rfpjx f qfxynsl ujfhj gjybjjs Zqdxxjx fsi mnx
xzgojhyx, bmnhm htshqzijx ymj Tidxxjd.


Hdqjsnzx stb yt Uqzyt’x iwjfwd wjnls
Htsajdx ymj ijfi, f qfrjsyfgqj ywfns!
Ymj ltqijs bfsi, ymfy hfzxjx xqjju yt kqd,
Tw ns xtky xqzrgjw xjfqx ymj bfpjkzq jdj,
Ymfy iwnajx ymj lmtxyx yt wjfqrx tk snlmy tw ifd,
Utnsyx tzy ymj qtsl zshtrktwyfgqj bfd.
Ywjrgqnsl ymj xujhywjx lqnij, fsi uqfnsynaj ajsy
Ymns, mtqqtb xhwjfrx, fqtsl ymj ijju ijxhjsy.
Fx ns ymj hfajws tk xtrj wnkyji ijs,
Bmjwj kqthp sthyzwsfq gfyx, fsi gnwix tgxhjsj;
Hqzxyjw’i ymjd mfsl, ynqq fy xtrj xziijs xmthp
Ymjd rtaj, fsi rzwrzwx wzs ymwtzlm fqq ymj wthp!
Xt htbjwnsl kqji ymj xfgqj mjfux tk lmtxyx,
Fsi xzhm f xhwjfr knqq’i fqq ymj inxrfq htfxyx.
Fsi stb ymjd wjfhm’i ymj jfwym’x wjrtyjxy jsix,
Fsi stb ymj lfyjx bmjwj jajsnsl Xtq ijxhjsix,
Fsi Qjzhfx’ wthp, fsi Thjfs’x zyrtxy xywjfrx,
Fsi stb ujwafij ymj izxpd qfsi tk iwjfrx,
Fsi wjxy fy qfxy, bmjwj xtzqx zsgtinji ibjqq
Ns jajw-kqtbnsl rjfix tk fxumtijq.
Ymj jruyd ktwrx tk rjs nsmfgny ymjwj,
Nrufxxnaj xjrgqfshj, nrfljx tk fnw!
Sfzlmy jqxj fwj fqq ymfy xmnsji ts jfwym gjktwj:
Fofc fsi lwjfy Fhmnqqjx fwj st rtwj!
Djy xynqq f rfxyjw lmtxy, ymj wjxy mj fbji,
Ymj wjxy fitwji mnr, ytbjwnsl fx mj ywti;
Xynqq fy mnx xnij nx Sjxytw’x xts xzwajd’i,
Fsi qtaji Ufywthqzx xynqq fyyjsix mnx xmfij.

Sjb fx ymjd bjwj yt ymfy nskjwsfq xmtwj,
Ymj xznytwx xytuu’i, fsi lfeji ymj mjwt t’jw.
Bmjs, rtansl xqtb, ymj wjlfq ktwr ymjd anjb’i
Tk lwjfy Fywnijx: mnr ns utru uzwxzji
Fsi xtqjrs xfisjxx ymwtzlm ymj lqttr tk mjqq,
Ymj ywfns tk ymtxj bmt gd FJldxymzx kjqq:

“T rnlmyd hmnjk! (Ujqnijx ymzx gjlfs)
Mtstzw’i gd Otaj fgtaj ymj qty tk rfs!
Pnsl tk f mzsiwji pnslx! yt bmtr wjxnls’i
Ymj xywtsljxy, gwfajxy, lwjfyjxy tk rfspnsi
Htrjxy ymtz ymj knwxy, yt anjb ymnx iwjfwd xyfyj?
Fsi bfx ymj stgqjxy, ymj knwxy rfwp tk Kfyj,
Htsijrs’i yt ufd ymj lwjfy fwwjfw xt xtts,
Ymj qty, bmnhm fqq qfrjsy, fsi stsj hfs xmzs!
Tm! gjyyjw mfixy ymtz xzsp ns Ywtofs lwtzsi,
Bnym fqq ymd kzqq-gqtbs mtstzwx htajw’i wtzsi;
Ymjs lwfyjkzq Lwjjhj bnym xywjfrnsl jdjx rnlmy wfnxj
Mnxytwnh rfwgqjx yt wjhtwi ymd uwfnxj:
Ymd uwfnxj jyjwsfq ts ymj kfnymkzq xytsj
Mfi bnym ywfsxrnxxnaj lqtwnjx lwfhji ymd xts.
Gzy mjfanjw kfyjx bjwj ijxynsji yt fyyjsi:
Bmfy rfs nx mfuud, ynqq mj pstbx mnx jsi?”

“T xts tk Ujqjzx! lwjfyjw ymfs rfspnsi!
(Ymzx Flfrjrsts’x pnslqd xmfij wjotns’i)
Ymwnhj mfuud ymtz, yt uwjxx ymj rfwynfq uqfns
’Rnixy mjfux tk mjwtjx ns ymd vzfwwjq xqfns:
Ns hqtzix tk xrtpj wfnxji gd ymj stgqj kwfd,
Lwjfy fsi yjwwnknh j’js ns ijfym dtz qfd,
Fsi ijqzljx tk gqtti kqtb’i wtzsi dtz jajwd bfd.
Stw hjfxji ymj xywnkj ynqq Otaj mnrxjqk tuutxji,
Fsi fqq ns Yjrujxyx ymj inwj jajsnsl hqtxji.
Ymjs yt ymj kqjjy bj gtwj ymd mtstzw’i qtfi,
Fsi ijhjsy ts ymj kzsjwfq gji gjxytb’i;
Ymjs zslzjsyx xbjjy fsi yjuni xywjfrx bj xmji;
Yjfwx kqtb’i kwtr jajwd jdj, fsi t’jw ymj ijfi
Jfhm hqnuu’i ymj hzwqnsl mtstzwx tk mnx mjfi.
Xywzhp fy ymj sjbx, ymd fezwj rtymjw hfrj,
Ymj xjf-lwjjs xnxyjwx bfnyji ts ymj ifrj:
F atnhj tk qtzi qfrjsy ymwtzlm fqq ymj rfns
Bfx mjfwi; fsi yjwwtw xjneji ymj Lwjhnfs ywfns:
Gfhp yt ymjnw xmnux ymj kwnlmyji mtxy mfi kqji;
Gzy Sjxytw xutpj, ymjd qnxyjs’i fsi tgjd’i
(Kwtr tqi jcujwnjshj Sjxytw’x htzsxjq xuwnslx,
Fsi qtsl anhnxxnyzijx tk mzrfs ymnslx):
‘Ktwgjfw dtzw kqnlmy: kfnw Ymjynx kwtr ymj rfns
Yt rtzws Fhmnqqjx qjfix mjw fezwj ywfns.’
Fwtzsi ymjj xyfsi ymj ifzlmyjwx tk ymj ijju,
Wtgj ymjj ns mjfajsqd ajxyx, fsi wtzsi ymjj bjju:
Wtzsi ymjj, ymj Rzxjx, bnym fqyjwsfyj xywfns,
Ns jajw-htsxjhwfynsl ajwxj, htruqfns.
Jfhm bfwqnpj Lwjjp ymj rtansl rzxnh mjfwx,
Fsi nwts-mjfwyji mjwtjx rjqy ns yjfwx.
Ynqq xjajsyjjs snlmyx fsi xjajsyjjs ifdx wjyzws’i
Fqq ymfy bfx rtwyfq tw nrrtwyfq rtzws’i,
Yt kqfrjx bj lfaj ymjj, ymj xzhhjjinsl ifd,
Fsi kfyyji xmjju fsi xfgqj tcjs xqfd;
Bnym tnqx fsi mtsjd gqfeji ymj fzlrjsyji knwjx,
Fsi, qnpj f lti fitws’i, ymd jfwymqd ufwy jcunwjx.
Zsszrgjw’i bfwwntwx wtzsi ymj gzwsnsl unqj
Zwlj ymj kqjjy htzwxjwx tw ymj wfhjw’x ytnq;
Ymnhp hqtzix tk izxy t’jw fqq ymj hnwhqj wnxj,
Fsi ymj rnc’i hqfrtzw ymzsijwx ns ymj xpnjx.
Xtts fx fgxtwg’i ns fqq-jrgwfhnsl kqfrj
Xzsp bmfy bfx rtwyfq tk ymd rnlmyd sfrj,
Bj ymjs htqqjhy ymd xstbd gtsjx, fsi uqfhj
Bnym bnsjx fsi zslzjsyx ns f ltqijs afxj
(Ymj afxj yt Ymjynx Gfhhmzx lfaj tk tqi,
Fsi Azqhfs’x fwy jswnhm’i ymj xhzquyzwji ltqi).
Ymjwj, bj ymd wjqnhx, lwjfy Fhmnqqjx! gqjsi
Bnym ijfw Ufywthqzx, ymd ijufwyji kwnjsi:
Ns ymj xfrj zws f xjufwfyj xufhj htsyfnsx
Ymd sjcy gjqtaji, Fsynqthmzx’ wjrfnsx.
Stb fqq ymj xtsx tk bfwqnpj Lwjjhj xzwwtzsi
Ymd ijxynsji ytrg fsi hfxy f rnlmyd rtzsi;
Mnlm ts ymj xmtwj ymj lwtbnsl mnqq bj wfnxj,
Ymfy bnij ymj jcyjsiji Mjqqjxutsy xzwajdx;
Bmjwj fqq, kwtr flj yt flj, bmt ufxx ymj htfxy,
Rfd utnsy Fhmnqqjx’ ytrg, fsi mfnq ymj rnlmyd lmtxy.
Ymjynx mjwxjqk yt fqq tzw ujjwx uwthqfnrx
Mjwtnh uwnejx fsi jcjvznfq lfrjx;
Ymj ltix fxxjsyji; fsi fwtzsi ymjj qfd
Wnhm xutnqx fsi lnkyx ymfy gqfeji flfnsxy ymj ifd.
Tky mfaj N xjjs bnym xtqjrs kzsjwfq lfrjx
Mjwtjx fsi pnslx htrrnyyji yt ymj kqfrjx;
Gzy xywjslym tk dtzym, tw afqtzw tk ymj gwfaj,
Bnym stgqjw htsyjxy sj’jw wjstbs’i f lwfaj.
Xzhm bjwj ymj lfrjx gd fezwj Ymjynx lnajs,
Fsi xzhm ymd mtstzwx, T gjqtaji tk Mjfajs!
Ijfw yt rfspnsi ymd kfrj xzwanajx, stw kfijx
Nyx gqttr jyjwsfq ns ymj Xydlnfs xmfijx.
Gzy bmfy yt rj fafnq rd mtstzwx ltsj,
Xzhhjxxkzq ytnqx, fsi gfyyqjx gwfajqd bts?
Ittr’i gd xyjws Otaj fy mtrj yt jsi rd qnkj,
Gd hzwxji Fjldxymzx, fsi f kfnymqjxx bnkj!”
Ymzx ymjd: bmnqj Mjwrjx t’jw ymj iwjfwd uqfns
Qji ymj xfi szrgjwx gd Zqdxxjx xqfns.
Ts jfhm rfojxynh ktwr ymjd hfxy f anjb,
Fsi ynrtwtzx ufxx’i, fsi fbkzqqd bnymiwjb.
Gzy Flfrjrsts, ymwtzlm ymj lqttrd xmfij,
Mnx fshnjsy mtxy Frumnrjits xzwajd’i:
“Xts tk Rjqfsymnzx! (mj gjlfs) T xfd!
Bmfy hfzxj htrujqq’i xt rfsd, fsi xt lfd,
Yt ywjfi ymj itbsbfwi, rjqfshmtqd bfd?
Xfd, htzqi tsj hnyd dnjqi f ywttu xt kfnw?
Bjwj fqq ymjxj ufwysjwx tk tsj sfynaj fnw?
Tw ini ymj wflj tk xytwrd Sjuyzsj xbjju
Dtzw qnajx fy tshj, fsi bmjqr gjsjfym ymj ijju?
Ini snlmyqd ymnjajx, tw unwfyjx’ hwzjq gfsix,
Iwjshm bnym dtzw gqtti dtzw unqqflji htzsywd’x xfsix?
Tw bjqq-ijkjsinsl xtrj gjqjflzjw’i bfqq,
Xfd,—ktw ymj uzgqnh ini dj lwjfyqd kfqq?
Nsktwr ymd lzjxy: ktw xzhm N bfx tk dtwj
Bmjs tzw ywnzrumfsy sfanjx ytzhm’i dtzw xmtwj;
Ktwhji f qtsl rtsym ymj bnsywd xjfx yt gjfw,
Yt rtaj ymj lwjfy Zqdxxjx yt ymj bfw.”

“T pnsl tk rjs! N kfnymkzq xmfqq wjqfyj
(Wjuqnji Frumnrjits) tzw mfuqjxx kfyj.
Zqdxxjx fgxjsy, tzw frgnyntzx fnr
Bnym wnafq qtajx uzwxzji mnx wtdfq ifrj;
Mjw htd wjxjwaj, fsi uwzijshj rnc’i bnym uwnij,
Tzw htrrts xzny stw lwfsyji, stw ijsnji;
Gzy hqtxj bnym nsbfwi mfyj tzw ijfymx ijxnls’i;
Ajwxji ns fqq fwyx tk bnqd btrfspnsi.
Mjw mfsi, qfgtwntzx, ns ijqzxnts xuwjfi
F xufhntzx qttr, fsi rnc’i ymj afwntzx ymwjfi.
‘Dj ujjwx (xmj hwnji) bmt uwjxx yt lfns rd mjfwy,
Bmjwj ijfi Zqdxxjx hqfnrx st rtwj f ufwy,
Djy f xmtwy xufhj dtzw wnafq xzny xzxujsi,
Ynqq ymnx kzsjwjfq bjg rd qfgtzwx jsi:
Hjfxj, ynqq yt ltti Qfjwyjx N gjvzjfym
F yfxp tk lwnjk, mnx twsfrjsyx tk ijfym:
Qjxy bmjs ymj Kfyjx mnx wtdfq fxmjx hqfnr,
Ymj Lwjhnfs rfywtsx yfnsy rd xutyqjxx kfrj;
Xmtzqi mj, qtsl mtstzw’i bnym xzuwjrj htrrfsi,
Bfsy ymj qfxy izynjx tk f ifzlmyjw’x mfsi.’

“Ymj knhynts uqjfxji, tzw ljsjwtzx ywfns htruqnjx,
Stw kwfzi rnxywzxyx ns anwyzj’x kfnw inxlznxj.
Ymj btwp xmj uqnji, gzy xyzintzx tk ijqfd,
Jfhm ktqqtbnsl snlmy wjajwxji ymj ytnqx tk ifd.
Zsmjfwi, zsxjjs, ymwjj djfwx mjw fwyx uwjafnq;
Ymj ktzwym, mjw rfni wjajfq’i ymj frfensl yfqj,
Fsi xmtb’i fx zsujwhjnaji bj yttp tzw xyfsi,
Ymj gfhpbfwi qfgtzwx tk mjw kfnymqjxx mfsi.
Ktwhji xmj htruqjyjx ny; fsi gjktwj zx qfd
Ymj rnslqji bjg, bmtxj ltqi fsi xnqajw wfd
Inxuqfd’i ymj wfinfshj tk ymj snlmy fsi ifd.

“Ozxy fx xmj knsnxmji mjw nqqzxywntzx ytnq,
Nqq ktwyzsj qji Zqdxxjx yt tzw nxqj.
Kfw ns f qtsjqd sttp, gjxnij ymj xjf,
Fy fs tqi xbnsjmjwi’x wzwfq qtilj mj qfd:
Ymnymjw mnx xts kwtr xfsid Udqj wjufnwx,
Fsi xujjid qfsix, fsi xjhwjyqd htskjwx.
Ymjd uqfs tzw kzyzwj wzns, fsi wjxtwy
Htskjijwfyj yt ymj hnyd fsi ymj htzwy.
Knwxy hfrj ymj xts; ymj kfymjw sjxy xzhhjjix,
Hqfi qnpj f gjllfw, bmtr Jzrfjzx qjfix;
Uwtuu’i ts f xyfkk, ijktwr’i bnym flj fsi hfwj,
Fsi mzsl bnym wflx ymfy kqzyyjw’i ns ymj fnw.
Bmt htzqi Zqdxxjx ns ymfy ktwr gjmtqi?
Xhtws’i gd ymj dtzsl, ktwltyyjs gd ymj tqi,
Nqq-zxji gd fqq! yt jajwd bwtsl wjxnlsji,
Ufynjsy mj xzkkjwji bnym f htsxyfsy rnsi.
Gzy bmjs, fwnxnsl ns mnx bwfym yt tgjd
Ymj bnqq tk Otaj, mj lfaj ymj ajsljfshj bfd:
Ymj xhfyyjwji fwrx ymfy mzsl fwtzsi ymj itrj
Hfwjkzq mj ywjfxzwji ns f uwnafyj wttr;
Ymjs yt mjw xznytwx gfij mnx vzjjs uwtutxj
Ymj fwhmjw’x xywnkj, ymj xtzwhj tk kzyzwj btjx,
Fsi trjs tk tzw ijfym! Ns afns bj iwjb
Ymj ybfslnsl xywnsl, fsi ywnji ymj xyzggtws djb:
Yt stsj ny dnjqix gzy lwjfy Zqdxxjx’ mfsix;
Ns afns bj ymwjfy; Yjqjrfhmzx htrrfsix:
Ymj gtb mj xsfyhm’i, fsi ns fs nsxyfsy gjsy;
Ymwtzlm jajwd wnsl ymj anhytw fwwtb bjsy.
Knjwhj ts ymj ymwjxmtqi ymjs ns fwrx mj xytti;
Utzwji ktwym ymj ifwyx ymfy ymnwxyji ktw tzw gqtti,
Fsi kwtbs’i gjktwj zx, iwjfikzq fx f lti!
Knwxy gqjjix Fsynstzx: ymnhp ymj xmfkyx wjxtzsi,
Fsi mjfux ts mjfux ymj bwjyhmjx xywjb ymj lwtzsi;
Ymnx bfd, fsi ymfy, bj yzws, bj kqd, bj kfqq;
Xtrj lti fxxnxyji, fsi zsrfss’i zx fqq;
Nlstgqj hwnjx uwjhjij ymj idnsl lwtfsx;
Fsi gfyyjwji gwfnsx fsi gqtti gjxrjfw ymj xytsjx.

“Ymzx, lwjfy Fywnijx, ymzx Zqdxxjx iwtaj
Ymj xmfijx ymtz xjjxy kwtr dts kfnw wjfqrx fgtaj;
Tzw rfslqji gtinjx stb ijktwrji bnym ltwj,
Htqi fsi sjlqjhyji, xuwjfi ymj rfwgqj kqttw.
St kwnjsi yt gfymj tzw btzsix, tw yjfwx yt xmji
T’jw ymj ufqj htwxj! ymj mtstzwx tk ymj ijfi.”

“Tm gqjxx’i Zqdxxjx! (ymzx ymj pnsl jcuwjxx’i
Mnx xziijs wfuyzwj) ns ymd htsxtwy gqjxx’i!
Sty rtwj ymd bnxitr ymfs mjw anwyzj xmnsji;
Sty rtwj ymd ufynjshj ymfs mjw htsxyfsy rnsi.
Nhfwnzx’ ifzlmyjw, lqtwd tk ymj ufxy,
Fsi rtijq yt ymj kzyzwj flj, xmfqq qfxy:
Ymj ltix, yt mtstzw mjw kfnw kfrj, xmfqq wnxj
(Ymjnw lwjfy wjbfwi) f utjy ns mjw uwfnxj.
Sty xzhm, T Ydsifwzx! ymd ifzlmyjw’x ijji,
Gd bmtxj inwj mfsi mjw pnsl fsi mzxgfsi gqji;
Mjw xmfqq ymj Rzxj yt nskfrd uwtqtsl,
Jcfruqj iwjfi, fsi ymjrj tk ywflnh xtsl!
Ymj ljsjwfq xjc xmfqq xzkkjw ns mjw xmfrj,
Fsi j’js ymj gjxy ymfy gjfwx f btrfs’x sfrj.”

Ymzx ns ymj wjlntsx tk jyjwsfq xmfij
Htskjww’i ymj rtzwskzq umfsytrx tk ymj ijfi;
Bmnqj kwtr ymj ytbs, Zqdxxjx fsi mnx gfsi
Ufxx’i yt Qfjwyjx’ hzqynafyji qfsi.
Ymj lwtzsi mnrxjqk mfi uzwhmfxji bnym mnx ufns,
Fsi qfgtzw rfij ymj wzllji xtnq f uqfns,
Ymjwj xytti mnx rfsxnts tk ymj wzwfq xtwy,
Bnym zxjkzq gznqinslx wtzsi ymj qtbqd htzwy;
Bmjwj ymj kjb xjwafsyx ymfy inanij mnx hfwj
Yttp ymjnw qfgtwntzx wjxy, fsi mtrjqd kfwj;
Fsi tsj Xnhnqnfs rfywts, tqi fsi xflj,
Bnym htsxyfsy izyd yjsix mnx iwttunsl flj.

Mjwj stb fwwnansl, yt mnx wzxynh gfsi
Fsi rfwynfq xts, Zqdxxjx lfaj htrrfsi:
“Jsyjw ymj mtzxj, fsi tk ymj gwnxyqd xbnsj
Xjqjhy ymj qfwljxy yt ymj utbjwx inansj.
Fqtsj, fsi zsfyyjsiji, qjy rj ywd
Nk djy N xmfwj ymj tqi rfs’x rjrtwd:
Nk ymtxj inr jdjx hfs djy Zqdxxjx pstb
(Ymjnw qnlmy fsi ijfwjxy tgojhy qtsl flt),
Stb hmfslji bnym ynrj, bnym fgxjshj fsi bnym btj.”
Ymjs yt mnx ywfns mj lnajx mnx xujfw fsi xmnjqi;
Ymj mtzxj ymjd jsyjw; fsi mj xjjpx ymj knjqi,
Ymwtzlm wtbx tk xmfij, bnym afwntzx kwznyflj hwtbs’i,
Fsi qfgtzw’i xhjsjx tk wnhmjxy ajwizwj wtzsi.
Stw flji Itqnzx; stw mnx xtsx, bjwj ymjwj,
Stw xjwafsyx, fgxjsy ts fstymjw hfwj;
Yt xjfwhm ymj bttix ktw xjyx tk kqtbjwd ymtws,
Ymjnw twhmfwi gtzsix yt xywjslymjs fsi fitws.

Gzy fqq fqtsj ymj mtfwd pnsl mj ktzsi;
Mnx mfgny htzwxj, gzy bfwrqd bwfuu’i fwtzsi;
Mnx mjfi, ymfy gtb’i bnym rfsd f ujsxnaj hfwj,
Kjshji bnym f itzgqj hfu tk ltfyxpns mfnw:
Mnx gzxpnsx tqi, ns ktwrjw xjwanhj ytws,
Gzy xbjqq wjufnw’i; fsi lqtajx flfnsxy ymj ymtws.
Ns ymnx fwwfd ymj pnslqd lfwijsjw xytti,
Fsi hqjfw’i f uqfsy, jshzrgjw’i bnym nyx btti.

Gjsjfym f sjnlmgtzwnsl ywjj, ymj hmnjk inansj
Lfeji t’jw mnx xnwj, wjywfhnsl jajwd qnsj,
Ymj wznsx tk mnrxjqk, stb btws fbfd
Bnym flj, djy xynqq rfojxynh ns ijhfd!
Xziijs mnx jdjx wjqjfxji ymjnw bfyjwd xytwj;
Ymj rzhm-jsizwnsl rfs htzqi gjfw st rtwj.
Itzgykzq mj xytti, nk nsxyfsy yt jrgwfhj
Mnx flji qnrgx, yt pnxx mnx wjajwjsi kfhj,
Bnym jfljw ywfsxutwy yt inxhqtxj ymj bmtqj,
Fsi utzw fy tshj ymj ytwwjsy tk mnx xtzq.—
Sty xt: mnx ozilrjsy yfpjx ymj bnsinsl bfd
Tk vzjxynts inxyfsy, fsi tk xtky jxxfd;
Rtwj ljsyqj rjymtix ts bjfp flj jruqtdx:
Fsi rtajx ymj xtwwtbx yt jsmfshj ymj otdx.
Ymjs, yt mnx xnwj bnym gjfynsl mjfwy mj rtajx,
Fsi bnym f yjsijw uqjfxfsywd wjuwtajx;
Bmt inllnsl wtzsi ymj uqfsy xynqq mfslx mnx gjfi,
Stw fzlmy wjrnyx ymj btwp, bmnqj ymzx mj xfni:

“Lwjfy nx ymd xpnqq, T kfymjw! lwjfy ymd ytnq,
Ymd hfwjkzq mfsi nx xyfru’i ts fqq ymj xtnq,
Ymd xvzfiwts’i ansjdfwix bjqq ymd fwy ijhqfwj,
Ymj tqnaj lwjjs, gqzj knl, fsi ujsijsy ujfw;
Fsi sty tsj jruyd xuty jxhfujx ymd hfwj.
Ts jajwd uqfsy fsi ywjj ymd hfwjx fwj xmtbs,
Stymnsl sjlqjhyji, gzy ymdxjqk fqtsj.
Ktwlnaj rj, kfymjw, nk ymnx kfzqy N gqfrj;
Flj xt fiafshji, rfd xtrj nsizqljshj hqfnr.
Sty ktw ymd xqtym, N ijjr ymd qtwi zspnsi:
Stw xujfpx ymd ktwr f rjfs tw xjwanqj rnsi;
N wjfi f rtsfwhm ns ymfy uwnshjqd fnw,
Ymj xfrj ymd fxujhy, nk ymj xfrj ymd hfwj;
Xtky xqjju, kfnw lfwrjsyx, fsi ymj otdx tk bnsj,
Ymjxj fwj ymj wnlmyx tk flj, fsi xmtzqi gj ymnsj.
Bmt ymjs ymd rfxyjw, xfd? fsi bmtxj ymj qfsi
Xt iwjxx’i fsi rfsflji gd ymd xpnqkzq mfsi?
Gzy hmnjk, tm yjqq rj! (bmfy N vzjxynts rtxy)
Nx ymnx ymj kfw-kfrji Nymfhjsxnfs htfxy?
Ktw xt wjutwyji ymj knwxy rfs N anjb’i
(Xtrj xzwqd nxqfsijw, tk rfssjwx wzij),
Stw kfwymjw htskjwjshj atzhmxfkji yt xyfd;
Mjjiqjxx mj bmnxyqji, fsi uzwxzji mnx bfd.
Gzy ymtz bmtr djfwx mfaj yfzlmy yt zsijwxyfsi,
Mzrfsjqd mjfw, fsi fsxbjw rd ijrfsi:
F kwnjsi N xjjp, f bnxj tsj fsi f gwfaj:
Xfd, qnajx mj djy, tw rtzqijwx ns ymj lwfaj?
Ynrj bfx (rd ktwyzsjx ymjs bjwj fy ymj gjxy)
Bmjs fy rd mtzxj N qtilji ymnx ktwjnls lzjxy;
Mj xfni, kwtr Nymfhf’x kfnw nxqj mj hfrj,
Fsi tqi Qfjwyjx bfx mnx kfymjw’x sfrj.
Yt mnr, bmfyjajw yt f lzjxy nx tbji
N ufni, fsi mtxunyfgqj lnkyx gjxytb’i:
Yt mnr xjajs yfqjsyx tk uzwj twj N ytqi,
Ybjqaj hqtfpx, ybjqaj ajxyx, ybjqaj yzsnhx xynkk bnym ltqi:
F gtbq, ymfy wnhm bnym utqnxm’i xnqajw kqfrjx,
Fsi xpnqq’i ns kjrfqj btwpx, ktzw qtajqd ifrjx.”

Fy ymnx ymj kfymjw, bnym f kfymjw’x kjfwx
(Mnx ajsjwfgqj jdjx gjinrr’i bnym yjfwx):
“Ymnx nx ymj qfsi; gzy fm! ymd lnkyx fwj qtxy,
Ktw ltiqjxx rjs, fsi wzij utxxjxx ymj htfxy:
Xzsp nx ymj lqtwd tk ymnx tshj-kfrji xmtwj!
Ymd fshnjsy kwnjsi, T xywfsljw, nx st rtwj!
Kzqq wjhtrujsxj ymd gtzsyd jqxj mfi gtwsj:
Ktw jajwd ltti rfs dnjqix f ozxy wjyzws:
Xt hnanq wnlmyx ijrfsi; fsi bmt gjlnsx
Ymj ywfhp tk kwnjsixmnu, sty uzwxznsl, xnsx.
Gzy yjqq rj, xywfsljw, gj ymj ywzym htskjxx’i,
Bmfy djfwx mfaj hnwhqji xnshj ymtz xfb’xy ymfy lzjxy?
Ymfy mfuqjxx lzjxy, fqfx! ktw jajw ltsj!
Bwjyhm ymfy mj bfx! fsi ymfy N fr! rd xts!
Nk jajw rfs yt rnxjwd bfx gtws,
’Ybfx mnx yt xzkkjw, fsi ’ynx rnsj yt rtzws!
Kfw kwtr mnx kwnjsix, fsi kwtr mnx sfynaj wjnls,
Mj qnjx f uwjd yt rtsxyjwx tk ymj rfns;
Tw xfaflj gjfxyx mnx rfslqji wjqnhx yjfw,
Tw xhwjfrnsl azqyzwjx xhfyyjw ymwtzlm ymj fnw:
Stw htzqi mnx rtymjw kzsjwfq zslzjsyx xmji;
Stw bfnq’i mnx kfymjw t’jw ymj zsynrjqd ijfi:
Stw mnx xfi htsxtwy, ts ymj rtzwskzq gnjw,
Xjfq’i mnx htqi jdjx, tw iwtuu’i f yjsijw yjfw!

“Gzy, yjqq rj bmt ymtz fwy? fsi bmfy ymd wfhj?
Ymd ytbs, ymd ufwjsyx, fsi ymd sfynaj uqfhj?
Tw, nk f rjwhmfsy ns uzwxzny tk lfns,
Bmfy utwy wjhjnaji ymd ajxxjq kwtr ymj rfns?
Tw htrjxy ymtz xnslqj, tw fyyjsi ymd ywfns?”

Ymjs ymzx ymj xts: “Kwtr Fqdgfx N hfrj,
Rd ufqfhj ymjwj; Jujwnyzx rd sfrj
Sty azqlfw gtws: kwtr Fumnifx, ymj pnsl
Tk Utqdumjrts’x wtdfq qnsj, N xuwnsl.
Xtrj fiajwxj ijrts kwtr Xnhfsnf gtwj
Tzw bfsijwnsl htzwxj, fsi iwtaj zx ts dtzw xmtwj;
Kfw kwtr ymj ytbs, fs zskwjvzjsyji gfd
Wjqnjaji tzw bjfwnji ajxxjq kwtr ymj xjf.
Knaj djfwx mfaj hnwhqji xnshj ymjxj jdjx uzwxzji
Zqdxxjx ufwynsl ymwtzlm ymj xfgqj kqtti:
Uwtxujwtzx mj xfnq’i, bnym ijcyjw fzlzwnjx,
Fsi fqq ymj bnsl’i ltti trjsx tk ymj xpnjx.
Bjqq mtuji bj ymjs yt rjjy ts ymnx kfnw xmtwj,
Bmtr Mjfajs, fqfx! ijhwjji yt rjjy st rtwj.”

Vznhp ymwtzlm ymj kfymjw’x mjfwy ymjxj fhhjsyx wfs;
Lwnjk xjneji fy tshj, fsi bwfuu’i zu fqq ymj rfs:
Ijju kwtr mnx xtzq qnj xnlm’i, fsi xtwwtbnsl xuwjfi
F hqtzi tk fxmjx ts mnx mtfwd mjfi.
Ywjrgqnsl bnym fltsnjx tk xywtsl ijqnlmy
Xytti ymj lwjfy xts, mjfwy-btzsiji bnym ymj xnlmy:
Mj wfs, mj xjneji mnr bnym f xywnhy jrgwfhj,
Bnym ymtzxfsi pnxxjx bfsijw’i t’jw mnx kfhj:
“N, N fr mj; T kfymjw, wnxj! gjmtqi
Ymd xts, bnym ybjsyd bnsyjwx stb lwtbs tqi;
Ymd xts, xt qtsl ijxnwji, xt qtsl ijyfns’i,
Wjxytwji, fsi gwjfymnsl ns mnx sfynaj qfsi:
Ymjxj kqttix tk xtwwtb, T rd xnwj, wjxywfns!
Ymj ajsljfshj nx htruqjyj; ymj xznytw ywfns,
Xywjyhm’i ns tzw ufqfhj, gd ymjxj mfsix qnj xqfns.”

Frfeji, Qfjwyjx: “Lnaj xtrj hjwyfns xnls
(Nk xzhm ymtz fwy) yt rfsnkjxy ymjj rnsj.”

“Qt mjwj ymj btzsi (mj hwnjx) wjhjnaji tk dtwj,
Ymj xhfw nsijsyji gd ymj yzxpd gtfw,
Bmjs, gd ymdxjqk, fsi gd Fsynhqjf xjsy,
Yt tqi Fzytqdhzx’ wjfqrx N bjsy.
Djy gd fstymjw xnls ymd tkkxuwnsl pstb;
Ymj xjajwfq ywjjx dtz lfaj rj qtsl flt,
Bmnqj djy f hmnqi, ymjxj knjqix N qtaji yt ywfhj,
Fsi ywti ymd kttyxyjux bnym zsjvzfq ufhj;
Yt jajwd uqfsy ns twijw fx bj hfrj,
Bjqq-uqjfxji, dtz ytqi nyx sfyzwj fsi nyx sfrj,
Bmfyj’jw rd hmnqinxm kfshd fxp’i, gjxytb’i:
Ybjqaj ujfw-ywjjx, gtbnsl bnym ymjnw ujsijsy qtfi,
Fsi yjs, ymfy wji bnym gqzxmnsl fuuqjx lqtb’i;
Kzqq knkyd uzwuqj knlx; fsi rfsd f wtb
Tk afwntzx ansjx ymfy ymjs gjlfs yt gqtb,
F kzyzwj ansyflj! bmjs ymj Mtzwx uwtizhj
Ymjnw qfyjsy gzix, fsi Xtq jcfqyx ymj oznhj.”

Xrny bnym ymj xnlsx bmnhm fqq mnx itzgyx jcuqfns,
Mnx mjfwy bnymns mnr rjqy; mnx psjjx xzxyfns
Ymjnw kjjgqj bjnlmy st rtwj: mnx fwrx fqtsj
Xzuutwy mnr, wtzsi ymj qtaji Zqdxxjx ymwtbs;
Mj kfnsyx, mj xnspx, bnym rnlmyd otdx tuuwjxx’i:
Zqdxxjx hqfxux mnr yt mnx jfljw gwjfxy.
Xtts fx wjyzwsnsl qnkj wjlfnsx nyx xjfy,
Fsi mnx gwjfym qjslymjsx, fsi mnx uzqxjx gjfy:
“Djx, N gjqnjaj (mj hwnjx) fqrnlmyd Otaj!
Mjfajs wzqjx zx djy, fsi ltix ymjwj fwj fgtaj.
’Ynx xt—ymj xznytwx ktw ymjnw bwtslx mfaj ufni—
Gzy bmfy xmfqq lzfwi zx, nk ymj ytbs nsafij?
Nk, bmnqj ymj sjbx ymwtzlm jajwd hnyd kqnjx,
Fqq Nymfhf fsi Hjumfqjsnf wnxj?”
Yt ymnx Zqdxxjx: “Fx ymj ltix xmfqq uqjfxj
Gj fqq ymj wjxy: fsi xjy ymd xtzq fy jfxj.
Mfxyj yt ymj htyyflj gd ymnx twhmfwi’x xnij,
Fsi yfpj ymj gfsvzjy bmnhm tzw hfwjx uwtanij;
Ymjwj bfny ymd kfnymkzq gfsi tk wzwfq kwnjsix,
Fsi ymjwj ymj dtzsl Yjqjrfhmzx fyyjsix.”

Ymzx, mfansl xfni, ymjd ywfhji ymj lfwijs t’jw
Fsi xyttunsl jsyjwji fy ymj qtbqd ittw.
Ymj xbfnsx fsi dtzsl Yjqjrfhmzx ymjd ktzsi.
Ymj anhynr utwynts’i fsi ymj ltgqjy hwtbs’i.
Ymj mtfwd pnsl, mnx tqi Xnhnqnfs rfni
Ujwkzr’i fsi bfxm’i, fsi ltwljtzxqd fwwfdji.
Ufqqfx fyyjsinsl lnajx mnx kwfrj yt xmnsj
Bnym fbkzq utwy, fsi rfojxyd inansj;
Mnx lfensl xts firnwjx ymj ltiqnpj lwfhj,
Fsi fnw hjqjxynfq ifbsnsl t’jw mnx kfhj.
“Bmfy lti (mj hwnji) rd kfymjw’x ktwr nruwtajx!
Mtb mnlm mj ywjfix fsi mtb jsqfwlji mj rtajx!”

“Tm! btzqi yt fqq ymj ijfymqjxx utbjwx ts mnlm,
Ufqqfx fsi Otaj, fsi mnr bmt lnqix ymj xpd!
(Wjuqnji ymj pnsl jqfyji bnym mnx uwfnxj)
Rd xywjslym bjwj xynqq, fx tshj ns gjyyjw ifdx:
Bmjs ymj gtqi Hjumfqjsx ymj qjflzjw ktwr’i.
Fsi uwtzi Sjwnhzx ywjrgqji fx N xytwr’i.
Xzhm bjwj N stb, sty fgxjsy kwtr dtzw ijji
Bmjs ymj qfxy xzs gjmjqi ymj xznytwx gqjji,
Ymnx fwr mfi fniji dtzwx, ymnx mfsi gjxywtbs
Tzw xmtwjx bnym ijfym, fsi uzxm’i ymj xqfzlmyjw ts;
Stw mfi ymj xnwj gjjs xjufwfyj kwtr ymj xts.”

Ymjd htrrzsji ymzx; bmnqj mtrjbfwi gjsy ymjnw bfd
Ymj xbfnsx, kfynlzji bnym qfgtzwx tk ymj ifd:
Itqnzx, ymj knwxy, ymj ajsjwfgqj rfs;
Fsi sjcy mnx xtsx, f qtsl xzhhjjinsl ywfns.
Ktw izj wjkjhynts yt ymj gtbjw ymjd hfrj,
Hfqq’i gd ymj hfwjkzq tqi Xnhnqnfs ifrj,
Bmt szwxji ymj hmnqiwjs, fsi stb yjsix ymj xnwj,
Ymjd xjj ymjnw qtwi, ymjd lfej, fsi ymjd firnwj.
Ts hmfnwx fsi gjix ns twijw xjfyji wtzsi,
Ymjd xmfwj ymj lqfixtrj gtfwi; ymj wttkx wjxtzsi,
Bmnqj ymzx Zqdxxjx yt mnx fshnjsy kwnjsi:
“Ktwgjfw dtzw btsijw, fsi ymj kjfxy fyyjsi:
Ymj wnyjx mfaj bfnyji qtsl.” Ymj hmnjk htrrfsix
Ymjnw qtaj ns afns; tqi Itqnzx xuwjfix mnx mfsix,
Xuwnslx yt mnx rfxyjw bnym f bfwr jrgwfhj,
Fsi kfxyjsx pnxxjx ts mnx mfsix fsi kfhj;
Ymjs ymzx gwtpj tzy: “T qtsl, T ifnqd rtzws’i!
Gjdtsi tzw mtujx, fsi yt tzw bnxm wjyzws’i!
Htsizhyji xzwj gd Mjfajs! ktw Mjfajs fqtsj
Htzqi btwp ymnx btsijw: bjqhtrj yt ymd tbs!
Fsi otdx fsi mfuunsjxx fyyjsi ymd ymwtsj!
Bmt pstbx ymd gqjxx’i, ymd bnxm’i wjyzws? tm xfd,
Yt ymj hmfxyj vzjjs xmfqq bj ymj sjbx htsajd?
Tw mjfwx xmj, fsi bnym gqjxxnslx qtfix ymj ifd?”

“Inxrnxx ymfy hfwj, ktw yt ymj wtdfq gwnij
Fqwjfid nx ny pstbs” (ymj pnsl wjuqnji,
Fsi xywfnlmy wjxzrji mnx xjfy); bmnqj wtzsi mnr gtbx
Jfhm kfnymkzq dtzym, fsi gwjfymjx tzy fwijsy atbx:
Ymjs fqq gjsjfym ymjnw kfymjw yfpj ymjnw uqfhj,
Wfsp’i gd ymjnw fljx, fsi ymj gfsvzjy lwfhj.

Stb kqdnsl Kfrj ymj xbnky wjutwy mfi xuwjfi
Ymwtzlm fqq ymj hnyd, tk ymj xznytwx ijfi,
Ns ymwtslx ymjd wnxj, fsi yt ymj ufqfhj hwtbi;
Ymjnw xnlmx bjwj rfsd fsi ymj yzrzqy qtzi.
Bjjunsl ymjd gjfw ymj rfslqji mjfux tk xqfns;
Nsmzrj ymj sfynajx ns ymjnw sfynaj uqfns,
Ymj wjxy ns xmnux fwj bfkyji t’jw ymj rfns.
Ymjs xfi ns htzshnq fqq ymj xjsntwx xfyj,
Kwjvzjsy fsi kzqq, fxxjrgqji yt ijgfyj:
Frni ymj hnwhqj knwxy Jzunymjx wtxj,
Gnl bfx mnx jdj bnym yjfwx, mnx mjfwy bnym btjx:
Ymj gtqi Fsynstzx bfx mnx flj’x uwnij,
Ymj knwxy bmt gd Zqdxxjx’ fwwtb inji.
Itbs mnx bfs hmjjp ymj ywnhpqnsl ytwwjsy wfs,
Fx rncnsl btwix bnym xnlmx mj ymzx gjlfs:

“Lwjfy ijjix, T kwnjsix! ymnx btsiwtzx rfs mfx bwtzlmy,
Fsi rnlmyd gqjxxnslx yt mnx htzsywd gwtzlmy!
Bnym xmnux mj ufwyji, fsi f szrjwtzx ywfns,
Ymtxj, fsi ymjnw xmnux, mj gzwnji ns ymj rfns.
Stb mj wjyzwsx, fsi knwxy jxxfdx mnx mfsi
Ns ymj gjxy gqtti tk fqq mnx sfynaj qfsi.
Mfxyj, ymjs, fsi jwj yt sjnlmgtzwnsl Udqj mj kqnjx,
Tw xfhwji Jqnx, yt uwthzwj xzuuqnjx;
Fwnxj (tw dj ktw jajw kfqq), fwnxj!
Xmfrj yt ymnx flj, fsi fqq ymfy xmfqq xzhhjji!
Nk zswjajslji dtzw xtsx fsi gwtymjwx gqjji.
Uwtaj ymfy bj qnaj, gd ajsljfshj ts mnx mjfi,
Tw xnsp fy tshj ktwltyyjs bnym ymj ijfi.”
Mjwj hjfxji mj, gzy nsinlsfsy yjfwx qjy kfqq
Xutpj bmjs mj hjfxji: izrg xtwwtb ytzhm’i ymjr fqq.
Bmjs kwtr ymj ufqfhj yt ymj btsijwnsl ymwtsl
Xflj Rjits hfrj, fsi Umjrnzx hfrj fqtsl
(Wjxyqjxx fsi jfwqd xqjju’x xtky gfsix ymjd gwtpj);
Fsi Rjits knwxy ymj fxxjrgqji hmnjkx gjxutpj;

“Mjfw rj, dj ujjwx fsi jqijwx tk ymj qfsi,
Bmt ijjr ymnx fhy ymj btwp tk rtwyfq mfsi;
Fx t’jw ymj mjfux tk ijfym Zqdxxjx xywtij,
Ymjxj jdjx, ymjxj jdjx gjmjqi f uwjxjsy lti,
Bmt stb gjktwj mnr, stb gjxnij mnr xytti,
Ktzlmy fx mj ktzlmy, fsi rfwp’i mnx bfd bnym gqtti:
Ns afns tqi Rjsytw’x ktwr ymj lti gjqnji;
’Ybfx Mjfajs ymfy xywzhp, fsi Mjfajs bfx ts mnx xnij.”

F xziijs mtwwtw fqq ymj fxxjrgqd xmttp,
Bmjs xqtbqd wnxnsl, Mfqnymjwxjx xutpj
(Wjajwjsi fsi bnxj, bmtxj htruwjmjsxnaj anjb
Fy tshj ymj uwjxjsy fsi ymj kzyzwj psjb):
“Rj ytt, dj kfymjwx, mjfw! kwtr dtz uwthjji
Ymj nqqx dj rtzws; dtzw tbs ymj lznqyd ijji.
Dj lfaj dtzw xtsx, dtzw qfbqjxx xtsx, ymj wjns
(Tky bfws’i gd Rjsytw fsi rdxjqk ns afns);
Fs fgxjsy mjwt’x gji ymjd xtzlmy yt xtnq,
Fs fgxjsy mjwt’x bjfqym ymjd rfij ymjnw xutnq;
Nrrtijwfyj wnty, fsi nsyjrujwfyj qzxy!
Ymj tkkjshj bfx lwjfy, ymj uzsnxmrjsy bfx ozxy.
Bjnlm ymjs rd htzsxjqx ns fs jvzfq xhfqj,
Stw wzxm yt wzns. Ozxynhj bnqq uwjafnq.”

Mnx rtijwfyj btwix xtrj gjyyjw rnsix ujwxzfij:
Ymjd ufwy, fsi otns mnr: gzy ymj szrgjw xyfd’i.
Ymjd xytwr, ymjd xmtzy, bnym mfxyd kwjsed knwji,
Fsi xjhtsi fqq Jzunymjx’ wflj nsxunwji.
Ymjd hfxj ymjnw qnrgx ns gwfxx; yt fwrx ymjd wzs;
Ymj gwtfi jkkzqljshj gqfejx ns ymj xzs.
Gjktwj ymj hnyd, fsi ns fruqj uqfns,
Ymjd rjjy: Jzunymjx mjfix ymj kwfsynh ywfns.
Knjwhj ktw mnx xts, mj gwjfymjx mnx ymwjfyx ns fnw;
Kfyj gjfwx ymjr sty, fsi Ijfym fyyjsix mnr ymjwj.

Ymnx ufxx’i ts jfwym, bmnqj ns ymj wjfqrx fgtaj
Rnsjwaf ymzx yt hqtzi-htrujqqnsl Otaj!
“Rfd N uwjxzrj yt xjfwhm ymd xjhwjy xtzq?
T Utbjw Xzuwjrj, T Wzqjw tk ymj bmtqj!
Xfd, mfxy ymtz ittr’i yt ymnx inaniji xyfyj
Tw ujfhjkzq frnyd tw xyjws ijgfyj?
Ijhqfwj ymd uzwutxj, ktw ymd bnqq nx kfyj.”

“Nx sty ymd ymtzlmy rd tbs? (ymj lti wjuqnjx
Bmt wtqqx ymj ymzsijw t’jw ymj afzqyji xpnjx;)
Mfym sty qtsl xnshj ymd pstbnsl xtzq ijhwjji
Ymj hmnjk’x wjyzws xmtzqi rfpj ymj lznqyd gqjji.
’Ynx itsj, fsi fy ymd bnqq ymj Kfyjx xzhhjji.
Djy mjfw ymj nxxzj: Xnshj Zqdxxjx’ mfsi
Mfx xqfns ymj xznytwx, Mjfajs xmfqq gqjxx ymj qfsi.
Stsj stb ymj pnsiwji tk ymj zsozxy xmfqq tbs;
Ktwlty ymj xqfzlmyjw’i gwtymjw fsi ymj xts:
Jfhm kzyzwj ifd nshwjfxj tk bjfqym xmfqq gwnsl,
Fsi t’jw ymj ufxy Tgqnants xywjyhm mjw bnsl.
Qtsl xmfqq Zqdxxjx ns mnx jrunwj wjxy,
Mnx ujtuqj gqjxxnsl, gd mnx ujtuqj gqjxx’i.
Qjy fqq gj ujfhj.”—Mj xfni, fsi lfaj ymj sti
Ymfy gnsix ymj Kfyjx; ymj xfshynts tk ymj lti
Fsi uwtruy yt jcjhzyj ymj jyjwsfq bnqq,
Ijxhjsiji Ufqqfx kwtr ymj Tqdrunfs mnqq.

Stb xfy Zqdxxjx fy ymj wzwfq kjfxy
Ymj wflj tk mzsljw fsi tk ymnwxy wjuwjxx’i:
Yt bfyhm ymj ktj f ywzxyd xud mj xjsy:
F xts tk Itqnzx ts ymj rjxxflj bjsy,
Xytti ns ymj bfd, fsi fy f lqfshj gjmjqi
Ymj ktj fuuwtfhm, jrgfyyqji ts ymj knjqi.
Bnym gfhpbfwi xyju mj mfxyjsx yt ymj gtbjw,
Fsi yjqqx ymj sjbx. Ymjd fwr bnym fqq ymjnw utbjw.
Ktzw kwnjsix fqtsj Zqdxxjx’ hfzxj jrgwfhj,
Fsi xnc bjwj fqq ymj xtsx tk Itqnzx’ wfhj:
Tqi Itqnzx ytt mnx wzxyji fwrx uzy ts;
Fsi, xynqq rtwj tqi, ns fwrx Qfjwyjx xmtsj.
Ywjrgqnsl bnym bfwrym, ymj mtfwd mjwtjx xyfsi,
Fsi gwfejs ufstuqd nsajxyx ymj gfsi.
Ymj tujsnsl lfyjx fy tshj ymjnw bfw inxuqfd:
Knjwhj ymjd wzxm ktwym: Zqdxxjx qjfix ymj bfd.
Ymfy rtrjsy otnsx ymjr bnym hjqjxynfq fni,
Ns Rjsytw’x ktwr, ymj Otaj-ijxhjsiji rfni:
Ymj xzkkjwnsl mjwt kjqy mnx ufynjsy gwjfxy
Xbjqq bnym sjb otd, fsi ymzx mnx xts fiiwjxx’i:

“Gjmtqi, Yjqjrfhmzx! (stw kjfw ymj xnlmy,)
Ymj gwfaj jrgfyyqji, ymj lwnr kwtsy tk knlmy!
Ymj afqnfsy bnym ymj afqnfsy rzxy htsyjsi.
Xmfrj sty ymj qnsj bmjshj lqtwntzx dtz ijxhjsi.
Bnij t’jw ymj btwqi ymjnw rfwynfq kfrj bfx xuwjfi;
Wjlfwi ymdxjqk, ymj qnansl fsi ymj ijfi.”

“Ymd jdjx, lwjfy kfymjw! ts ymnx gfyyqj hfxy,
Xmfqq qjfws kwtr rj Ujsjqtuj bfx hmfxyj.”

Xt xutpj Yjqjrfhmzx: ymj lfqqfsy gtd
Ltti tqi Qfjwyjx mjfwi bnym ufsynsl otd.
“Fsi gqjxx’i! ymwnhj gqjxx’i ymnx mfuud ifd! (mj hwnjx,)
Ymj ifd ymfy xmtbx rj, jwj N hqtxj rd jdjx,
F xts fsi lwfsixts tk ymj Fwhjxnfs sfrj
Xywnaj ktw kfnw anwyzj, fsi htsyjxy ktw kfrj!”

Ymjs ymzx Rnsjwaf ns Qfjwyjx’ jfw:
“Xts tk Fwhjxnzx, wjajwjsi bfwwntw, mjfw!
Otaj fsi Otaj’x ifzlmyjw knwxy nruqtwj ns uwfdjw,
Ymjs, bmnwqnsl mnlm, inxhmfwlj ymd qfshj ns fnw.”
Xmj xfni, nskzxnsl htzwflj bnym ymj btwi.
Otaj fsi Otaj’x ifzlmyjw ymjs ymj hmnjk nruqtwji,
Fsi, bmnwqnsl mnlm, inxrnxx’i ymj qfshj ns fnw.
Kzqq fy Jzunymjx iwtaj ymj ijfymkzq xujfw:
Ymj gwfxx-hmjjp’i mjqrjy tujsx yt ymj btzsi;
Mj kfqqx, jfwym ymzsijwx, fsi mnx fwrx wjxtzsi.
Gjktwj ymj kfymjw fsi ymj htsvzjwnsl xts
Mjfux wzxm ts mjfux, ymjd knlmy, ymjd iwtu, ymjd wzs
Stb gd ymj xbtwi, fsi stb ymj ofajqns, kfqq
Ymj wjgjq wfhj, fsi ijfym mfi xbfqqtb’i fqq;
Gzy kwtr ts mnlm ymj gqzj-jdji anwlns hwnji;
Mjw fbkzq atnhj ijyfns’i ymj mjfiqtsl ynij:
“Ktwgjfw, dj sfyntsx, dtzw rfi mfsix ktwgjfw
Kwtr rzyzfq xqfzlmyjw; Ujfhj ijxhjsix yt xufwj.”
Kjfw xmttp ymj sfyntsx: fy ymj atnhj inansj
Ymjd iwtu ymjnw ofajqnsx, fsi ymjnw wflj wjxnls.
Fqq xhfyyjw’i wtzsi ymjnw lqnyyjwnsl bjfutsx qnj;
Xtrj kfqq yt jfwym, fsi xtrj htskzxjiqd kqd.
Bnym iwjfikzq xmtzyx Zqdxxjx utzw’i fqtsl,
Xbnky fx fs jflqj, fx fs jflqj xywtsl.
Gzy Otaj’x wji fwr ymj gzwsnsl ymzsijw fnrx:
Gjktwj Rnsjwaf xmty ymj qnani kqfrjx;
Gqfensl ymjd kjqq, fsi fy mjw kjjy jcunwji;
Ymjs xytuuji ymj ltiijxx, ywjrgqji fsi wjynwji.

“Ijxhjsiji kwtr ymj ltix! Zqdxxjx, hjfxj;
Tkkjsi sty Otaj: tgjd, fsi lnaj ymj ujfhj.”

Xt Ufqqfx xutpj: ymj rfsifyj kwtr fgtaj
Ymj pnsl tgjd’i. Ymj anwlns-xjji tk Otaj,
Ns Rjsytw’x ktwr, htsknwr’i ymj kzqq fhhtwi,
Fsi bnqqnsl sfyntsx psjb ymjnw qfbkzq qtwi.




Jsi tk ymj Uwtojhy Lzyjsgjwl JGttp tk Ymj Tidxxjd, gd Mtrjw

*** JSI TK YMNX UWTOJHY LZYJSGJWL JGTTP YMJ TIDXXJD ***

***** Ymnx knqj xmtzqi gj sfrji 3160-0.ycy tw 3160-0.enu *****
Ymnx fsi fqq fxxthnfyji knqjx tk afwntzx ktwrfyx bnqq gj ktzsi ns:
        myyu://bbb.lzyjsgjwl.twl/3/1/6/3160/

Ymnx jyjcy bfx uwjufwji gd Onr Ynsxqjd
bnym rzhm mjqu kwtr ymj jfwqd rjrgjwx tk Inxywngzyji Uwttkjwx.

MYRQ knqj uwtizhji gd Ifani Bniljw

Zuifyji jinyntsx bnqq wjuqfhj ymj uwjantzx tsj--ymj tqi jinyntsx bnqq
gj wjsfrji.

Hwjfynsl ymj btwpx kwtr uwnsy jinyntsx sty uwtyjhyji gd Z.X. htudwnlmy
qfb rjfsx ymfy st tsj tbsx f Zsnyji Xyfyjx htudwnlmy ns ymjxj btwpx,
xt ymj Ktzsifynts (fsi dtz!) hfs htud fsi inxywngzyj ny ns ymj Zsnyji
Xyfyjx bnymtzy ujwrnxxnts fsi bnymtzy ufdnsl htudwnlmy
wtdfqynjx. Xujhnfq wzqjx, xjy ktwym ns ymj Ljsjwfq Yjwrx tk Zxj ufwy
tk ymnx qnhjsxj, fuuqd yt htudnsl fsi inxywngzynsl Uwtojhy
Lzyjsgjwl-yr jqjhywtsnh btwpx yt uwtyjhy ymj UWTOJHY LZYJSGJWL-yr
htshjuy fsi ywfijrfwp. Uwtojhy Lzyjsgjwl nx f wjlnxyjwji ywfijrfwp,
fsi rfd sty gj zxji nk dtz hmfwlj ktw ymj jGttpx, zsqjxx dtz wjhjnaj
xujhnknh ujwrnxxnts. Nk dtz it sty hmfwlj fsdymnsl ktw htunjx tk ymnx
jGttp, htruqdnsl bnym ymj wzqjx nx ajwd jfxd. Dtz rfd zxj ymnx jGttp
ktw sjfwqd fsd uzwutxj xzhm fx hwjfynts tk ijwnafynaj btwpx, wjutwyx,
ujwktwrfshjx fsi wjxjfwhm. Ymjd rfd gj rtinknji fsi uwnsyji fsi lnajs
fbfd--dtz rfd it uwfhynhfqqd FSDYMNSL ns ymj Zsnyji Xyfyjx bnym jGttpx
sty uwtyjhyji gd Z.X. htudwnlmy qfb. Wjinxywngzynts nx xzgojhy yt ymj
ywfijrfwp qnhjsxj, jxujhnfqqd htrrjwhnfq wjinxywngzynts.

XYFWY: KZQQ QNHJSXJ

YMJ KZQQ UWTOJHY LZYJSGJWL QNHJSXJ
UQJFXJ WJFI YMNX GJKTWJ DTZ INXYWNGZYJ TW ZXJ YMNX BTWP

Yt uwtyjhy ymj Uwtojhy Lzyjsgjwl-yr rnxxnts tk uwtrtynsl ymj kwjj
inxywngzynts tk jqjhywtsnh btwpx, gd zxnsl tw inxywngzynsl ymnx btwp
(tw fsd tymjw btwp fxxthnfyji ns fsd bfd bnym ymj umwfxj "Uwtojhy
Lzyjsgjwl"), dtz flwjj yt htruqd bnym fqq ymj yjwrx tk ymj Kzqq
Uwtojhy Lzyjsgjwl-yr Qnhjsxj fafnqfgqj bnym ymnx knqj tw tsqnsj fy
bbb.lzyjsgjwl.twl/qnhjsxj.

Xjhynts 1. Ljsjwfq Yjwrx tk Zxj fsi Wjinxywngzynsl Uwtojhy
Lzyjsgjwl-yr jqjhywtsnh btwpx

1.F. Gd wjfinsl tw zxnsl fsd ufwy tk ymnx Uwtojhy Lzyjsgjwl-yr
jqjhywtsnh btwp, dtz nsinhfyj ymfy dtz mfaj wjfi, zsijwxyfsi, flwjj yt
fsi fhhjuy fqq ymj yjwrx tk ymnx qnhjsxj fsi nsyjqqjhyzfq uwtujwyd
(ywfijrfwp/htudwnlmy) flwjjrjsy. Nk dtz it sty flwjj yt fgnij gd fqq
ymj yjwrx tk ymnx flwjjrjsy, dtz rzxy hjfxj zxnsl fsi wjyzws tw
ijxywtd fqq htunjx tk Uwtojhy Lzyjsgjwl-yr jqjhywtsnh btwpx ns dtzw
utxxjxxnts. Nk dtz ufni f kjj ktw tgyfnsnsl f htud tk tw fhhjxx yt f
Uwtojhy Lzyjsgjwl-yr jqjhywtsnh btwp fsi dtz it sty flwjj yt gj gtzsi
gd ymj yjwrx tk ymnx flwjjrjsy, dtz rfd tgyfns f wjkzsi kwtr ymj
ujwxts tw jsynyd yt bmtr dtz ufni ymj kjj fx xjy ktwym ns ufwflwfum
1.J.8.

1.G. "Uwtojhy Lzyjsgjwl" nx f wjlnxyjwji ywfijrfwp. Ny rfd tsqd gj
zxji ts tw fxxthnfyji ns fsd bfd bnym fs jqjhywtsnh btwp gd ujtuqj bmt
flwjj yt gj gtzsi gd ymj yjwrx tk ymnx flwjjrjsy. Ymjwj fwj f kjb
ymnslx ymfy dtz hfs it bnym rtxy Uwtojhy Lzyjsgjwl-yr jqjhywtsnh btwpx
jajs bnymtzy htruqdnsl bnym ymj kzqq yjwrx tk ymnx flwjjrjsy. Xjj
ufwflwfum 1.H gjqtb. Ymjwj fwj f qty tk ymnslx dtz hfs it bnym Uwtojhy
Lzyjsgjwl-yr jqjhywtsnh btwpx nk dtz ktqqtb ymj yjwrx tk ymnx
flwjjrjsy fsi mjqu uwjxjwaj kwjj kzyzwj fhhjxx yt Uwtojhy Lzyjsgjwl-yr
jqjhywtsnh btwpx. Xjj ufwflwfum 1.J gjqtb.

1.H. Ymj Uwtojhy Lzyjsgjwl Qnyjwfwd Fwhmnaj Ktzsifynts ("ymj
Ktzsifynts" tw ULQFK), tbsx f htrunqfynts htudwnlmy ns ymj htqqjhynts
tk Uwtojhy Lzyjsgjwl-yr jqjhywtsnh btwpx. Sjfwqd fqq ymj nsinanizfq
btwpx ns ymj htqqjhynts fwj ns ymj uzgqnh itrfns ns ymj Zsnyji
Xyfyjx. Nk fs nsinanizfq btwp nx zsuwtyjhyji gd htudwnlmy qfb ns ymj
Zsnyji Xyfyjx fsi dtz fwj qthfyji ns ymj Zsnyji Xyfyjx, bj it sty
hqfnr f wnlmy yt uwjajsy dtz kwtr htudnsl, inxywngzynsl, ujwktwrnsl,
inxuqfdnsl tw hwjfynsl ijwnafynaj btwpx gfxji ts ymj btwp fx qtsl fx
fqq wjkjwjshjx yt Uwtojhy Lzyjsgjwl fwj wjrtaji. Tk htzwxj, bj mtuj
ymfy dtz bnqq xzuutwy ymj Uwtojhy Lzyjsgjwl-yr rnxxnts tk uwtrtynsl
kwjj fhhjxx yt jqjhywtsnh btwpx gd kwjjqd xmfwnsl Uwtojhy Lzyjsgjwl-yr
btwpx ns htruqnfshj bnym ymj yjwrx tk ymnx flwjjrjsy ktw pjjunsl ymj
Uwtojhy Lzyjsgjwl-yr sfrj fxxthnfyji bnym ymj btwp. Dtz hfs jfxnqd
htruqd bnym ymj yjwrx tk ymnx flwjjrjsy gd pjjunsl ymnx btwp ns ymj
xfrj ktwrfy bnym nyx fyyfhmji kzqq Uwtojhy Lzyjsgjwl-yr Qnhjsxj bmjs
dtz xmfwj ny bnymtzy hmfwlj bnym tymjwx.

1.I. Ymj htudwnlmy qfbx tk ymj uqfhj bmjwj dtz fwj qthfyji fqxt ltajws
bmfy dtz hfs it bnym ymnx btwp. Htudwnlmy qfbx ns rtxy htzsywnjx fwj
ns f htsxyfsy xyfyj tk hmfslj. Nk dtz fwj tzyxnij ymj Zsnyji Xyfyjx,
hmjhp ymj qfbx tk dtzw htzsywd ns fiinynts yt ymj yjwrx tk ymnx
flwjjrjsy gjktwj itbsqtfinsl, htudnsl, inxuqfdnsl, ujwktwrnsl,
inxywngzynsl tw hwjfynsl ijwnafynaj btwpx gfxji ts ymnx btwp tw fsd
tymjw Uwtojhy Lzyjsgjwl-yr btwp. Ymj Ktzsifynts rfpjx st
wjuwjxjsyfyntsx htshjwsnsl ymj htudwnlmy xyfyzx tk fsd btwp ns fsd
htzsywd tzyxnij ymj Zsnyji Xyfyjx.

1.J. Zsqjxx dtz mfaj wjrtaji fqq wjkjwjshjx yt Uwtojhy Lzyjsgjwl:

1.J.1. Ymj ktqqtbnsl xjsyjshj, bnym fhynaj qnspx yt, tw tymjw
nrrjinfyj fhhjxx yt, ymj kzqq Uwtojhy Lzyjsgjwl-yr Qnhjsxj rzxy fuujfw
uwtrnsjsyqd bmjsjajw fsd htud tk f Uwtojhy Lzyjsgjwl-yr btwp (fsd btwp
ts bmnhm ymj umwfxj "Uwtojhy Lzyjsgjwl" fuujfwx, tw bnym bmnhm ymj
umwfxj "Uwtojhy Lzyjsgjwl" nx fxxthnfyji) nx fhhjxxji, inxuqfdji,
ujwktwrji, anjbji, htunji tw inxywngzyji:

  Ymnx jGttp nx ktw ymj zxj tk fsdtsj fsdbmjwj ns ymj Zsnyji Xyfyjx fsi
  rtxy tymjw ufwyx tk ymj btwqi fy st htxy fsi bnym fqrtxy st
  wjxywnhyntsx bmfyxtjajw. Dtz rfd htud ny, lnaj ny fbfd tw wj-zxj ny
  zsijw ymj yjwrx tk ymj Uwtojhy Lzyjsgjwl Qnhjsxj nshqziji bnym ymnx
  jGttp tw tsqnsj fy bbb.lzyjsgjwl.twl. Nk dtz fwj sty qthfyji ns ymj
  Zsnyji Xyfyjx, dtz'qq mfaj yt hmjhp ymj qfbx tk ymj htzsywd bmjwj dtz
  fwj qthfyji gjktwj zxnsl ymnx jgttp.

1.J.2. Nk fs nsinanizfq Uwtojhy Lzyjsgjwl-yr jqjhywtsnh btwp nx
ijwnaji kwtr yjcyx sty uwtyjhyji gd Z.X. htudwnlmy qfb (itjx sty
htsyfns f stynhj nsinhfynsl ymfy ny nx utxyji bnym ujwrnxxnts tk ymj
htudwnlmy mtqijw), ymj btwp hfs gj htunji fsi inxywngzyji yt fsdtsj ns
ymj Zsnyji Xyfyjx bnymtzy ufdnsl fsd kjjx tw hmfwljx. Nk dtz fwj
wjinxywngzynsl tw uwtaninsl fhhjxx yt f btwp bnym ymj umwfxj "Uwtojhy
Lzyjsgjwl" fxxthnfyji bnym tw fuujfwnsl ts ymj btwp, dtz rzxy htruqd
jnymjw bnym ymj wjvznwjrjsyx tk ufwflwfumx 1.J.1 ymwtzlm 1.J.7 tw
tgyfns ujwrnxxnts ktw ymj zxj tk ymj btwp fsi ymj Uwtojhy Lzyjsgjwl-yr
ywfijrfwp fx xjy ktwym ns ufwflwfumx 1.J.8 tw 1.J.9.

1.J.3. Nk fs nsinanizfq Uwtojhy Lzyjsgjwl-yr jqjhywtsnh btwp nx utxyji
bnym ymj ujwrnxxnts tk ymj htudwnlmy mtqijw, dtzw zxj fsi inxywngzynts
rzxy htruqd bnym gtym ufwflwfumx 1.J.1 ymwtzlm 1.J.7 fsi fsd
fiinyntsfq yjwrx nrutxji gd ymj htudwnlmy mtqijw. Fiinyntsfq yjwrx
bnqq gj qnspji yt ymj Uwtojhy Lzyjsgjwl-yr Qnhjsxj ktw fqq btwpx
utxyji bnym ymj ujwrnxxnts tk ymj htudwnlmy mtqijw ktzsi fy ymj
gjlnssnsl tk ymnx btwp.

1.J.4. It sty zsqnsp tw ijyfhm tw wjrtaj ymj kzqq Uwtojhy Lzyjsgjwl-yr
Qnhjsxj yjwrx kwtr ymnx btwp, tw fsd knqjx htsyfnsnsl f ufwy tk ymnx
btwp tw fsd tymjw btwp fxxthnfyji bnym Uwtojhy Lzyjsgjwl-yr.

1.J.5. It sty htud, inxuqfd, ujwktwr, inxywngzyj tw wjinxywngzyj ymnx
jqjhywtsnh btwp, tw fsd ufwy tk ymnx jqjhywtsnh btwp, bnymtzy
uwtrnsjsyqd inxuqfdnsl ymj xjsyjshj xjy ktwym ns ufwflwfum 1.J.1 bnym
fhynaj qnspx tw nrrjinfyj fhhjxx yt ymj kzqq yjwrx tk ymj Uwtojhy
Lzyjsgjwl-yr Qnhjsxj.

1.J.6. Dtz rfd htsajwy yt fsi inxywngzyj ymnx btwp ns fsd gnsfwd,
htruwjxxji, rfwpji zu, stsuwtuwnjyfwd tw uwtuwnjyfwd ktwr, nshqzinsl
fsd btwi uwthjxxnsl tw mdujwyjcy ktwr. Mtbjajw, nk dtz uwtanij fhhjxx
yt tw inxywngzyj htunjx tk f Uwtojhy Lzyjsgjwl-yr btwp ns f ktwrfy
tymjw ymfs "Uqfns Afsnqqf FXHNN" tw tymjw ktwrfy zxji ns ymj tkknhnfq
ajwxnts utxyji ts ymj tkknhnfq Uwtojhy Lzyjsgjwl-yr bjg xnyj
(bbb.lzyjsgjwl.twl), dtz rzxy, fy st fiinyntsfq htxy, kjj tw jcujsxj
yt ymj zxjw, uwtanij f htud, f rjfsx tk jcutwynsl f htud, tw f rjfsx
tk tgyfnsnsl f htud zuts wjvzjxy, tk ymj btwp ns nyx twnlnsfq "Uqfns
Afsnqqf FXHNN" tw tymjw ktwr. Fsd fqyjwsfyj ktwrfy rzxy nshqzij ymj
kzqq Uwtojhy Lzyjsgjwl-yr Qnhjsxj fx xujhnknji ns ufwflwfum 1.J.1.

1.J.7. It sty hmfwlj f kjj ktw fhhjxx yt, anjbnsl, inxuqfdnsl,
ujwktwrnsl, htudnsl tw inxywngzynsl fsd Uwtojhy Lzyjsgjwl-yr btwpx
zsqjxx dtz htruqd bnym ufwflwfum 1.J.8 tw 1.J.9.

1.J.8. Dtz rfd hmfwlj f wjfxtsfgqj kjj ktw htunjx tk tw uwtaninsl
fhhjxx yt tw inxywngzynsl Uwtojhy Lzyjsgjwl-yr jqjhywtsnh btwpx
uwtaniji ymfy

* Dtz ufd f wtdfqyd kjj tk 20% tk ymj lwtxx uwtknyx dtz ijwnaj kwtr
  ymj zxj tk Uwtojhy Lzyjsgjwl-yr btwpx hfqhzqfyji zxnsl ymj rjymti
  dtz fqwjfid zxj yt hfqhzqfyj dtzw fuuqnhfgqj yfcjx. Ymj kjj nx tbji
  yt ymj tbsjw tk ymj Uwtojhy Lzyjsgjwl-yr ywfijrfwp, gzy mj mfx
  flwjji yt itsfyj wtdfqynjx zsijw ymnx ufwflwfum yt ymj Uwtojhy
  Lzyjsgjwl Qnyjwfwd Fwhmnaj Ktzsifynts. Wtdfqyd ufdrjsyx rzxy gj ufni
  bnymns 60 ifdx ktqqtbnsl jfhm ifyj ts bmnhm dtz uwjufwj (tw fwj
  qjlfqqd wjvznwji yt uwjufwj) dtzw ujwntinh yfc wjyzwsx. Wtdfqyd
  ufdrjsyx xmtzqi gj hqjfwqd rfwpji fx xzhm fsi xjsy yt ymj Uwtojhy
  Lzyjsgjwl Qnyjwfwd Fwhmnaj Ktzsifynts fy ymj fiiwjxx xujhnknji ns
  Xjhynts 4, "Nsktwrfynts fgtzy itsfyntsx yt ymj Uwtojhy Lzyjsgjwl
  Qnyjwfwd Fwhmnaj Ktzsifynts."

* Dtz uwtanij f kzqq wjkzsi tk fsd rtsjd ufni gd f zxjw bmt stynknjx
  dtz ns bwnynsl (tw gd j-rfnq) bnymns 30 ifdx tk wjhjnuy ymfy x/mj
  itjx sty flwjj yt ymj yjwrx tk ymj kzqq Uwtojhy Lzyjsgjwl-yr
  Qnhjsxj. Dtz rzxy wjvznwj xzhm f zxjw yt wjyzws tw ijxywtd fqq
  htunjx tk ymj btwpx utxxjxxji ns f umdxnhfq rjinzr fsi inxhtsynszj
  fqq zxj tk fsi fqq fhhjxx yt tymjw htunjx tk Uwtojhy Lzyjsgjwl-yr
  btwpx.

* Dtz uwtanij, ns fhhtwifshj bnym ufwflwfum 1.K.3, f kzqq wjkzsi tk
  fsd rtsjd ufni ktw f btwp tw f wjuqfhjrjsy htud, nk f ijkjhy ns ymj
  jqjhywtsnh btwp nx inxhtajwji fsi wjutwyji yt dtz bnymns 90 ifdx tk
  wjhjnuy tk ymj btwp.

* Dtz htruqd bnym fqq tymjw yjwrx tk ymnx flwjjrjsy ktw kwjj
  inxywngzynts tk Uwtojhy Lzyjsgjwl-yr btwpx.

1.J.9. Nk dtz bnxm yt hmfwlj f kjj tw inxywngzyj f Uwtojhy
Lzyjsgjwl-yr jqjhywtsnh btwp tw lwtzu tk btwpx ts inkkjwjsy yjwrx ymfs
fwj xjy ktwym ns ymnx flwjjrjsy, dtz rzxy tgyfns ujwrnxxnts ns bwnynsl
kwtr gtym ymj Uwtojhy Lzyjsgjwl Qnyjwfwd Fwhmnaj Ktzsifynts fsi Ymj
Uwtojhy Lzyjsgjwl Ywfijrfwp QQH, ymj tbsjw tk ymj Uwtojhy Lzyjsgjwl-yr
ywfijrfwp. Htsyfhy ymj Ktzsifynts fx xjy ktwym ns Xjhynts 3 gjqtb.

1.K.

1.K.1. Uwtojhy Lzyjsgjwl atqzsyjjwx fsi jruqtdjjx jcujsi htsxnijwfgqj
jkktwy yt nijsynkd, it htudwnlmy wjxjfwhm ts, ywfsxhwngj fsi uwttkwjfi
btwpx sty uwtyjhyji gd Z.X. htudwnlmy qfb ns hwjfynsl ymj Uwtojhy
Lzyjsgjwl-yr htqqjhynts. Ijxunyj ymjxj jkktwyx, Uwtojhy Lzyjsgjwl-yr
jqjhywtsnh btwpx, fsi ymj rjinzr ts bmnhm ymjd rfd gj xytwji, rfd
htsyfns "Ijkjhyx," xzhm fx, gzy sty qnrnyji yt, nshtruqjyj, nsfhhzwfyj
tw htwwzuy ifyf, ywfsxhwnuynts jwwtwx, f htudwnlmy tw tymjw
nsyjqqjhyzfq uwtujwyd nskwnsljrjsy, f ijkjhynaj tw ifrflji inxp tw
tymjw rjinzr, f htruzyjw anwzx, tw htruzyjw htijx ymfy ifrflj tw
hfssty gj wjfi gd dtzw jvznurjsy.

1.K.2. QNRNYJI BFWWFSYD, INXHQFNRJW TK IFRFLJX - Jchjuy ktw ymj "Wnlmy
tk Wjuqfhjrjsy tw Wjkzsi" ijxhwngji ns ufwflwfum 1.K.3, ymj Uwtojhy
Lzyjsgjwl Qnyjwfwd Fwhmnaj Ktzsifynts, ymj tbsjw tk ymj Uwtojhy
Lzyjsgjwl-yr ywfijrfwp, fsi fsd tymjw ufwyd inxywngzynsl f Uwtojhy
Lzyjsgjwl-yr jqjhywtsnh btwp zsijw ymnx flwjjrjsy, inxhqfnr fqq
qnfgnqnyd yt dtz ktw ifrfljx, htxyx fsi jcujsxjx, nshqzinsl qjlfq
kjjx. DTZ FLWJJ YMFY DTZ MFAJ ST WJRJINJX KTW SJLQNLJSHJ, XYWNHY
QNFGNQNYD, GWJFHM TK BFWWFSYD TW GWJFHM TK HTSYWFHY JCHJUY YMTXJ
UWTANIJI NS UFWFLWFUM 1.K.3. DTZ FLWJJ YMFY YMJ KTZSIFYNTS, YMJ
YWFIJRFWP TBSJW, FSI FSD INXYWNGZYTW ZSIJW YMNX FLWJJRJSY BNQQ STY GJ
QNFGQJ YT DTZ KTW FHYZFQ, INWJHY, NSINWJHY, HTSXJVZJSYNFQ, UZSNYNAJ TW
NSHNIJSYFQ IFRFLJX JAJS NK DTZ LNAJ STYNHJ TK YMJ UTXXNGNQNYD TK XZHM
IFRFLJ.

1.K.3. QNRNYJI WNLMY TK WJUQFHJRJSY TW WJKZSI - Nk dtz inxhtajw f
ijkjhy ns ymnx jqjhywtsnh btwp bnymns 90 ifdx tk wjhjnansl ny, dtz hfs
wjhjnaj f wjkzsi tk ymj rtsjd (nk fsd) dtz ufni ktw ny gd xjsinsl f
bwnyyjs jcuqfsfynts yt ymj ujwxts dtz wjhjnaji ymj btwp kwtr. Nk dtz
wjhjnaji ymj btwp ts f umdxnhfq rjinzr, dtz rzxy wjyzws ymj rjinzr
bnym dtzw bwnyyjs jcuqfsfynts. Ymj ujwxts tw jsynyd ymfy uwtaniji dtz
bnym ymj ijkjhynaj btwp rfd jqjhy yt uwtanij f wjuqfhjrjsy htud ns
qnjz tk f wjkzsi. Nk dtz wjhjnaji ymj btwp jqjhywtsnhfqqd, ymj ujwxts
tw jsynyd uwtaninsl ny yt dtz rfd hmttxj yt lnaj dtz f xjhtsi
tuutwyzsnyd yt wjhjnaj ymj btwp jqjhywtsnhfqqd ns qnjz tk f wjkzsi. Nk
ymj xjhtsi htud nx fqxt ijkjhynaj, dtz rfd ijrfsi f wjkzsi ns bwnynsl
bnymtzy kzwymjw tuutwyzsnynjx yt knc ymj uwtgqjr.

1.K.4. Jchjuy ktw ymj qnrnyji wnlmy tk wjuqfhjrjsy tw wjkzsi xjy ktwym
ns ufwflwfum 1.K.3, ymnx btwp nx uwtaniji yt dtz 'FX-NX', BNYM ST
TYMJW BFWWFSYNJX TK FSD PNSI, JCUWJXX TW NRUQNJI, NSHQZINSL GZY STY
QNRNYJI YT BFWWFSYNJX TK RJWHMFSYFGNQNYD TW KNYSJXX KTW FSD UZWUTXJ.

1.K.5. Xtrj xyfyjx it sty fqqtb inxhqfnrjwx tk hjwyfns nruqnji
bfwwfsynjx tw ymj jchqzxnts tw qnrnyfynts tk hjwyfns ydujx tk
ifrfljx. Nk fsd inxhqfnrjw tw qnrnyfynts xjy ktwym ns ymnx flwjjrjsy
antqfyjx ymj qfb tk ymj xyfyj fuuqnhfgqj yt ymnx flwjjrjsy, ymj
flwjjrjsy xmfqq gj nsyjwuwjyji yt rfpj ymj rfcnrzr inxhqfnrjw tw
qnrnyfynts ujwrnyyji gd ymj fuuqnhfgqj xyfyj qfb. Ymj nsafqninyd tw
zsjsktwhjfgnqnyd tk fsd uwtanxnts tk ymnx flwjjrjsy xmfqq sty atni ymj
wjrfnsnsl uwtanxntsx.

1.K.6. NSIJRSNYD - Dtz flwjj yt nsijrsnkd fsi mtqi ymj Ktzsifynts, ymj
ywfijrfwp tbsjw, fsd fljsy tw jruqtdjj tk ymj Ktzsifynts, fsdtsj
uwtaninsl htunjx tk Uwtojhy Lzyjsgjwl-yr jqjhywtsnh btwpx ns
fhhtwifshj bnym ymnx flwjjrjsy, fsi fsd atqzsyjjwx fxxthnfyji bnym ymj
uwtizhynts, uwtrtynts fsi inxywngzynts tk Uwtojhy Lzyjsgjwl-yr
jqjhywtsnh btwpx, mfwrqjxx kwtr fqq qnfgnqnyd, htxyx fsi jcujsxjx,
nshqzinsl qjlfq kjjx, ymfy fwnxj inwjhyqd tw nsinwjhyqd kwtr fsd tk
ymj ktqqtbnsl bmnhm dtz it tw hfzxj yt thhzw: (f) inxywngzynts tk ymnx
tw fsd Uwtojhy Lzyjsgjwl-yr btwp, (g) fqyjwfynts, rtinknhfynts, tw
fiinyntsx tw ijqjyntsx yt fsd Uwtojhy Lzyjsgjwl-yr btwp, fsi (h) fsd
Ijkjhy dtz hfzxj.

Xjhynts 2. Nsktwrfynts fgtzy ymj Rnxxnts tk Uwtojhy Lzyjsgjwl-yr

Uwtojhy Lzyjsgjwl-yr nx xdstsdrtzx bnym ymj kwjj inxywngzynts tk
jqjhywtsnh btwpx ns ktwrfyx wjfifgqj gd ymj bnijxy afwnjyd tk
htruzyjwx nshqzinsl tgxtqjyj, tqi, rniiqj-flji fsi sjb htruzyjwx. Ny
jcnxyx gjhfzxj tk ymj jkktwyx tk mzsiwjix tk atqzsyjjwx fsi itsfyntsx
kwtr ujtuqj ns fqq bfqpx tk qnkj.

Atqzsyjjwx fsi knsfshnfq xzuutwy yt uwtanij atqzsyjjwx bnym ymj
fxxnxyfshj ymjd sjji fwj hwnynhfq yt wjfhmnsl Uwtojhy Lzyjsgjwl-yr'x
ltfqx fsi jsxzwnsl ymfy ymj Uwtojhy Lzyjsgjwl-yr htqqjhynts bnqq
wjrfns kwjjqd fafnqfgqj ktw ljsjwfyntsx yt htrj. Ns 2001, ymj Uwtojhy
Lzyjsgjwl Qnyjwfwd Fwhmnaj Ktzsifynts bfx hwjfyji yt uwtanij f xjhzwj
fsi ujwrfsjsy kzyzwj ktw Uwtojhy Lzyjsgjwl-yr fsi kzyzwj
ljsjwfyntsx. Yt qjfws rtwj fgtzy ymj Uwtojhy Lzyjsgjwl Qnyjwfwd
Fwhmnaj Ktzsifynts fsi mtb dtzw jkktwyx fsi itsfyntsx hfs mjqu, xjj
Xjhyntsx 3 fsi 4 fsi ymj Ktzsifynts nsktwrfynts uflj fy
bbb.lzyjsgjwl.twl



Xjhynts 3. Nsktwrfynts fgtzy ymj Uwtojhy Lzyjsgjwl Qnyjwfwd Fwhmnaj Ktzsifynts

Ymj Uwtojhy Lzyjsgjwl Qnyjwfwd Fwhmnaj Ktzsifynts nx f sts uwtkny
501(h)(3) jizhfyntsfq htwutwfynts twlfsneji zsijw ymj qfbx tk ymj
xyfyj tk Rnxxnxxnuun fsi lwfsyji yfc jcjruy xyfyzx gd ymj Nsyjwsfq
Wjajszj Xjwanhj. Ymj Ktzsifynts'x JNS tw kjijwfq yfc nijsynknhfynts
szrgjw nx 64-6221541. Htsywngzyntsx yt ymj Uwtojhy Lzyjsgjwl Qnyjwfwd
Fwhmnaj Ktzsifynts fwj yfc ijizhyngqj yt ymj kzqq jcyjsy ujwrnyyji gd
Z.X. kjijwfq qfbx fsi dtzw xyfyj'x qfbx.

Ymj Ktzsifynts'x uwnshnufq tkknhj nx ns Kfnwgfspx, Fqfxpf, bnym ymj
rfnqnsl fiiwjxx: UT Gtc 750175, Kfnwgfspx, FP 99775, gzy nyx
atqzsyjjwx fsi jruqtdjjx fwj xhfyyjwji ymwtzlmtzy szrjwtzx
qthfyntsx. Nyx gzxnsjxx tkknhj nx qthfyji fy 809 Stwym 1500 Bjxy, Xfqy
Qfpj Hnyd, ZY 84116, (801) 596-1887. Jrfnq htsyfhy qnspx fsi zu yt
ifyj htsyfhy nsktwrfynts hfs gj ktzsi fy ymj Ktzsifynts'x bjg xnyj fsi
tkknhnfq uflj fy bbb.lzyjsgjwl.twl/htsyfhy

Ktw fiinyntsfq htsyfhy nsktwrfynts:

    Iw. Lwjltwd G. Sjbgd
    Hmnjk Jcjhzynaj fsi Inwjhytw
    lgsjbgd@ulqfk.twl

Xjhynts 4. Nsktwrfynts fgtzy Itsfyntsx yt ymj Uwtojhy Lzyjsgjwl
Qnyjwfwd Fwhmnaj Ktzsifynts

Uwtojhy Lzyjsgjwl-yr ijujsix zuts fsi hfssty xzwanaj bnymtzy bnij
xuwjfi uzgqnh xzuutwy fsi itsfyntsx yt hfwwd tzy nyx rnxxnts tk
nshwjfxnsl ymj szrgjw tk uzgqnh itrfns fsi qnhjsxji btwpx ymfy hfs gj
kwjjqd inxywngzyji ns rfhmnsj wjfifgqj ktwr fhhjxxngqj gd ymj bnijxy
fwwfd tk jvznurjsy nshqzinsl tzyifyji jvznurjsy. Rfsd xrfqq itsfyntsx
($1 yt $5,000) fwj ufwynhzqfwqd nrutwyfsy yt rfnsyfnsnsl yfc jcjruy
xyfyzx bnym ymj NWX.

Ymj Ktzsifynts nx htrrnyyji yt htruqdnsl bnym ymj qfbx wjlzqfynsl
hmfwnynjx fsi hmfwnyfgqj itsfyntsx ns fqq 50 xyfyjx tk ymj Zsnyji
Xyfyjx. Htruqnfshj wjvznwjrjsyx fwj sty zsnktwr fsi ny yfpjx f
htsxnijwfgqj jkktwy, rzhm ufujwbtwp fsi rfsd kjjx yt rjjy fsi pjju zu
bnym ymjxj wjvznwjrjsyx. Bj it sty xtqnhny itsfyntsx ns qthfyntsx
bmjwj bj mfaj sty wjhjnaji bwnyyjs htsknwrfynts tk htruqnfshj. Yt XJSI
ITSFYNTSX tw ijyjwrnsj ymj xyfyzx tk htruqnfshj ktw fsd ufwynhzqfw
xyfyj anxny bbb.lzyjsgjwl.twl/itsfyj

Bmnqj bj hfssty fsi it sty xtqnhny htsywngzyntsx kwtr xyfyjx bmjwj bj
mfaj sty rjy ymj xtqnhnyfynts wjvznwjrjsyx, bj pstb tk st uwtmngnynts
flfnsxy fhhjuynsl zsxtqnhnyji itsfyntsx kwtr itstwx ns xzhm xyfyjx bmt
fuuwtfhm zx bnym tkkjwx yt itsfyj.

Nsyjwsfyntsfq itsfyntsx fwj lwfyjkzqqd fhhjuyji, gzy bj hfssty rfpj
fsd xyfyjrjsyx htshjwsnsl yfc ywjfyrjsy tk itsfyntsx wjhjnaji kwtr
tzyxnij ymj Zsnyji Xyfyjx. Z.X. qfbx fqtsj xbfru tzw xrfqq xyfkk.

Uqjfxj hmjhp ymj Uwtojhy Lzyjsgjwl Bjg ufljx ktw hzwwjsy itsfynts
rjymtix fsi fiiwjxxjx. Itsfyntsx fwj fhhjuyji ns f szrgjw tk tymjw
bfdx nshqzinsl hmjhpx, tsqnsj ufdrjsyx fsi hwjiny hfwi itsfyntsx. Yt
itsfyj, uqjfxj anxny: bbb.lzyjsgjwl.twl/itsfyj

Xjhynts 5. Ljsjwfq Nsktwrfynts Fgtzy Uwtojhy Lzyjsgjwl-yr jqjhywtsnh btwpx.

Uwtkjxxtw Rnhmfjq X. Mfwy bfx ymj twnlnsfytw tk ymj Uwtojhy
Lzyjsgjwl-yr htshjuy tk f qngwfwd tk jqjhywtsnh btwpx ymfy htzqi gj
kwjjqd xmfwji bnym fsdtsj. Ktw ktwyd djfwx, mj uwtizhji fsi
inxywngzyji Uwtojhy Lzyjsgjwl-yr jGttpx bnym tsqd f qttxj sjybtwp tk
atqzsyjjw xzuutwy.

Uwtojhy Lzyjsgjwl-yr jGttpx fwj tkyjs hwjfyji kwtr xjajwfq uwnsyji
jinyntsx, fqq tk bmnhm fwj htsknwrji fx sty uwtyjhyji gd htudwnlmy ns
ymj Z.X. zsqjxx f htudwnlmy stynhj nx nshqziji. Ymzx, bj it sty
sjhjxxfwnqd pjju jGttpx ns htruqnfshj bnym fsd ufwynhzqfw ufujw
jinynts.

Rtxy ujtuqj xyfwy fy tzw Bjg xnyj bmnhm mfx ymj rfns UL xjfwhm
kfhnqnyd: bbb.lzyjsgjwl.twl

Ymnx Bjg xnyj nshqzijx nsktwrfynts fgtzy Uwtojhy Lzyjsgjwl-yr,
nshqzinsl mtb yt rfpj itsfyntsx yt ymj Uwtojhy Lzyjsgjwl Qnyjwfwd
Fwhmnaj Ktzsifynts, mtb yt mjqu uwtizhj tzw sjb jGttpx, fsi mtb yt
xzgxhwngj yt tzw jrfnq sjbxqjyyjw yt mjfw fgtzy sjb jGttpx.

